---
title: Java Koans
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 1.5
category: apprenticeship
---

Today I focused on familiarizing myself with the Java syntax and concepts. As agreed in yesterday's iteration planning meeting (IPM) with my mentors Jim and Felipe, I started going through the Java Koans. 

<!--break-->

Koans exist for many programming languages and are designed to introduce the language, syntax, structure and some methods. They consist of several failing test suites and the task is to fix the code to make the tests pass. The tests are designed to guide the developer through the process. Each test suite is dedicated to a topic and the difficulty slowly increases. 

Yesterday  Jim had asked me to estimate how long it would take me to go through 18 of the Koans, starting at beginner level and continuing until about half way through the intermediate level. I had only ever looked at Koans for about 20 minutes before and that was for Clojure, so I really didn't know how long it would take me.

Also, I had never in my life used Java and was a bit concerned that it would take me hours to get set up with the development environment and figure out how to use IntelliJ. Just speaking from experience with these things... sometimes I can get stuck and then suddenly it's bed time.

I gave Jim quite a high estimate and (contrary to my previous job where I could estimate any amount of time and it was never questioned) he thought it was a bit too high! I have a history of overestimating how long stories will take me to complete, which was usually a happy surprise for the project managers but I guess it's not really an efficient way of working...

So, instead Jim asked me to take two hours this morning to familiarize myself with the Koans and then confirm how far I think I'd come in a set amount of time of 2.5 days. 

I started working on them and luckily felt that I could achieve the task in the given time. 

Now it is Tuesday evening and I've already completed 12 out of the 18 modules I was meant to do. Some modules are faster than others but I'm pretty confident that I'll be able to finish the Koans by tomorrow early afternoon, about one day ahead of time.

I can't wait to get better at estimating work. 

And at understanding Java.

