---
title: Coin changer kata with a different approach
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2
category: apprenticeship
---

Today during our daily Zagaku session, we talked about the Coin Changer kata.

<!--break-->

I had practised and performed the kata before, so I thought that I wouldn't learn a lot of new things. But the way that we approached the kata this morning, was very different from how I had done it and ended up discovering a lot of new things!

When I needed to learn the kata a few weeks ago, the aim was to perform the kata in a set amount of (short!) time. I focused on finding a quick way to solve it, but not too quick so that it was still clear how the algorithm developed with each test case. So the main focus was speed while not cutting too many corners. 

But the way Mateu suggested that we approach it this morning was from a completely different angle. A few of us hadn't done the kata before, so we all started from the beginning. We discussed each detail on how we should go about implementing it. Do we use UK coin denominations or American coins or Euros? What do we expect as a return from the method? A string? An array? A hash? We discussed the pros and cons for each. 

When I performed the kata, I used an Array because I felt it was easiest. But I hadn't really considered what the alternatives were and which option was the best and why.

Then we moved on to discussing which test cases to use. And we were still using the white board. In fact, we didn't write any code during the whole lesson. 

We mapped out a number of different test cases until we discovered some patterns between the test cases. The patterns then allowed us to categorise the tests. 

During my kata performance the other week I used almost all of the test cases but I didn't see all the different categories. 

When I say, I used "almost" all of the test case categories - I didn't test for what happens when there is a negative amount as input. The reason was that I didn't feel that it would help me develop the algorithm, so I didn't need it. But when you approach the kata more like a real life application, you definitely need to consider these edge cases.

The plan is to write three tests for each category because three is enough to spot a pattern. If three tests from the same category fail, it means that the code needs to be made generic enough to work for all of these cases.

We said we'd continue tomorrow and I'm looking forward to actually writing the code!

