---
title: Static variables vs. instance variables
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2.5
category: apprenticeship
---

In my Rock, Paper, Scissors application I was in a situation where I needed a method to return two different types of data. As this is not possible in Java, I wrapped those two data types inside an object and returned the object instead.

<!--break-->

I chose to use static class variables to store the two data types which has some pros and cons. Before going into the details, I will try to define what a static variable is and what an instance variable is.

##Static variable

Static variables, also called class variables, are associated to the class directly. They can be used without creating instances of the class. If there are instances of the class, then they all share the exact same variable. For example, if there is a person class with a name being a static variable, then any instance of the person class would have the same name. They are basically like a global variables. The life time of a static variable is the entire run time of the application.

##Instance variable

An instance variable is also defined in a class and outside of methods but each instance of the class has its own copy of the variable. So every time a new object is instantiated, a new copy of the instance variable is created. Similarly they are destroyed when the object is destroyed.


##Pros and cons of using static variables

I used static variables in my code because on first glance I thought it would be easier to refer to the variables in other parts of my application without having to create a new instance of the class. I didn't see the necessity to create instances when all I needed was to store and access the different data types.

However, while this approach looks like a good shortcut, it also has a lot of downsides. In fact, the downsides outweigh the convenience of being able to easily access the variables.

The first problem that presented itself in my code was that I wasn't able to fully test the game's play method. I needed to simulate the user selecting several options, for example "rock" and then "exit". But the problem with static variables is that I can only store one user choice during one run time but I needed two! I later changed my code to use instance variables and I simply created two instances of the class with each instance having a different user choice assigned to the variable.

Another downside is that static variables disregard one of the main principles of object oriented programming, which is encapsulation of data. The object oriented coding style should hide data inside objects. And if other objects want to find out about the data, they need to send messages between each other. However, when using static variables, any other objects can directly access the data inside those variables (as long as the static variables are public).

Static variables also make it hard to reason about the code as they represent global state. Any method in the whole application could modify static variables which makes it difficult to know which state the variables are in at any given time. That adds complexity to the codebase.

Another contra argument for using static variables is the fact that the static variables exist during the entire run time of the application and hence could potentially use up a lot of memory. 

In summary, there are a lot more negative side-effects to using static variables than benefits. In future I'll stick to instance variables. 

##When to use static variables

I was curious on when you would actually use static variables, seeing that Java provides them. I did some internet research to find out more. But the only use case that I could find is for constants (when using they keyword "final").




