---
title: SOLID - Open/Closed Principle
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2.5
category: apprenticeship
---
Today during 8th Light University we had three great presentations, one of which was about the Open/Closed Principle. 

I’m planning to create a post about each of the SOLID principles but so far have only written about [the first one](/blog/apprenticeship/day-6/). So I’m taking today's presentation as my cue to tackle the next one in line: Open/Closed Principle.

<!--break-->

The main premise of this principle is that “software entities should be open for extension but closed for modification”. 

So what exactly does that mean? 

Firstly, a software entity is a class or a module for example. But what does the extension and modification refer to?

Hm… it reminds of that one time when I had to change the layout of a template. I looked at the code for a long time. But even after staring at the 3,000 line Javascript view file and a possibly even larger CSS file for several hours I still wasn't confident that I knew what each line of code was doing. It was full of “TODO” comments and it was untested. In the end I concluded that I wasn’t going to touch any of the existing code and just write my own code at the bottom and thus overwrite the existing code where necessary. Thank you stylesheets for your cascading magic. So in a way that code was closed for modification due to illegibility and therefore I had to extend it.

But I am pretty sure this is not what is meant by the Open/Closed Principle! In theory there shouldn’t be any messy and hard to read code in software craftsman land to begin with. Also, it’s a principle for object oriented design, so I don’t think it applies to my adventures with front-end code.

OK, here is the example that Maël used during her presentation today. Imagine an octopus living in a fishbowl. When he gets hungry, he uses the fishbowl as a kitchen. So if the fishbowl is the class, Maël added an if statement `if hungry —> eat`. Then the octopus wanted to shower and used his same fishbowl again. So she had to modify the if statement to add `if dirty —> shower`. And then she had to modify the code again for `if tired —> sleep`. The if statement got longer each time and the existing code had to be modified. A violation of the Open/Closed Principle.

All these modification could have been avoided if the octopus had different rooms. In that case we can create a generic Room interface with one method `use()`. Each of the separate rooms would be a class: Bedroom, Kitchen, Bathroom. And each of these rooms implements the interface Room and therefore has the one method `use()`. So if the octopus now needed to park his car somewhere, a Garage class can be added which also implements the method `use()` and in this case it would refer to parking.

I found another example online. The following code violates the Open/Closed Principle: a class GraphicEditor needs to be modified each time a new shape is added. It has several methods like `drawCircle()` or `drawSquare()`. So a new `drawNewShape()` method would have to be added for a new shape. That also means that the unit tests for that class need to be updated. And there is a danger that adding a new shape could break or alter the existing functionality. 

This can be resolved by using an abstract `draw()` method instead of the individual `drawNewShape()` methods. The `draw()` method belongs to a Shape class from which the Rectangle and the Circle class inherit the draw method. So, to implement a new shape, the GraphicEditor class doesn’t need to be touched at all. 

To summarise: this principle recommends that good code should make it possible to add any new functionality without having to make major changes to the existing codebase. New functionality should be added as new classes which inherit from a super class or implement an interface. 