---
title: A visit from the 8th Light founder
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2
category: apprenticeship
---

This week, Micah, the founder of 8th Light came to London. Yesterday and today he held workshops with us.

<!--break-->

For yesterday's workshop his premise was that coding should be fun. So he had prepared a game for us that we tackled in small teams: the ant game. It is a game that Micah had written and that we could connect to via http requests. The goal of the game was to spawn ants and then make them move around on a grid to collect as much food as possible and bring it back to the nest, which was in the centre of the grid.

We were given an hour to write a programme that would collect food from a given coordinate on the grid. I teamed up with two of my colleagues and we decided to use Java to write a programme that would play the game. Unfortunately it took us some time to get started - maybe Java wasn’t quite the right choice of language for something that needed to be up and running quickly. So, after one hour we didn’t quite manage to establish a connection with the server to enter the game.

However, we had a few more opportunities. Everybody was given another hour or so to improve their programme and then compete again. This time we managed to connect and collect some food.

In the afternoon the task became more difficult because locations of the food on the grid changed. So you had to have a pretty clever algorithm for ants that would find the food automatically and then go back and forth between the food location and the nest until the food moved. Our idea was to let the ants go around the middle point in a spiral and then further and further out until they find the food. Unfortunately we ran out of time before we could implement this. 

Micah had prepared an algorithm that had three worker ants and two hunter ants that were looking around for food. So if one piece of food was moved, the programme already knew where the closest food was and the ants could go there. 

That was how we spent yesterday. For today Micah had an awesome surprise for us: Arduinos! He wanted us to all learn something new. I know a few of us had played with Arduinos before but for me it was almost completely new. I had seen it once at the Uncodebar conference but didn’t really understand what it was doing. So today I finally had the time to look at the book properly and follow the basic instructions about how to get started. It all made a lot more sense now. Although these tiny little connectors that you need to plug in are definitely a challenge for adult fingers.

I worked on the first couple of examples from the Arduino Projects book and in the afternoon paired with a friend to change the software to make it capable of doing a bit more.

So, Micah's goal was achieved: I definitely learnt something new today. That said, during my time at 8th Light I’ve learnt something new every day so far and I expect that it will continue in that way. It’s exciting!