---
title: A hash is a hash... or is it?
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 1
category: apprenticeship
---

Today I focused on the Java Koans and the Roman Numerals Kata. 

<!--break-->

Some of the Java Koans are becoming quite difficult now, while as some are still easy to solve. I have to admit that I don’t understand every single detail of them but I’m hoping that it will become clearer once I've used Java more. One of my stories this week was to complete the Java koans up to a certain point, which I’ve done. But I’m thinking that I might go through them again in a few weeks and hopefully by then some things will make more sense.

Another one of my stories for this week is to learn the Roman Numerals Kata in Java and do a screen recording of it once I’m comfortable with it. I spent some time yesterday and today to try out different approaches. 

Georgina performed the kata yesterday, so I knew that I should aim for finding an algorithm that uses two Arrays to match up the Roman and Arabic numbers. But I also wanted to try out using a Hash in Java, so I used that approach as well. 

Turns out, in Java, a Hash is not simply a Hash! I googled around to find an example on how to create a Hash and iterate over it. I used a Hashmap to start with and strangely it sorted the entries automatically by keys in ascending order. I needed the entries to be in insertion order for the algorithm to work, so that was no good. I googled some more and found a TreeMap but somehow I couldn’t get that to work either. 

Luckily Christoph helped me and advised me to use a LinkedHashMap which keeps the entries in the order that they’re added in. That worked and my tests passed.

This is one of the aspects that is so different from Ruby! In Ruby, a Hash is a Hash. But in Java there are all these variations of it!

Even though I finally cracked the kata using the LinkedHashMap, I’ve been practising it using two Arrays. Not only because Georgina presented it that way but also because I find it easier to code. I will also do the screen recording going down that route. 