---
title: What if a method needs to return two different data types?
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 1
category: apprenticeship
---

At the end of last week I felt that I was close to completing my weekly tasks, so I spoke to Felipe about how to improve my Rock, Paper, Scissors code. 

<!--break-->

He suggested a few small changes and one slightly bigger refactoring. I tackled the latter today. I had used an Enum for the game moves (rock, paper and scissors). However, one of the user options is “exit” which they can enter to stop the application. And I just included the option "exit" into the "Move" Enum. But exit isn’t really a move, so Felipe suggested that I should split it out. 

I created another Enum, the GameController Enum, which has the option “exit”. But then I ran into the issue that certain methods which previously simply returned the Move Enum, now suddenly needed to return either a GameController or a Move Enum. But, unlike in Ruby, you can only return one type of data in Java. 

To get around this issue I wrapped the different data types in an object. I created a UserChoice class and set two field variables to Move Enum and to GameController Enum respectively. And when using the object in the method that converts the user input (string) into the respective Enum, I just set the field variables of the UserChoice class accordingly and return the whole object. And when I need either the Move enum or the GameController enum in other methods,  I can access the variables again. 

I wasn't sure if this was the right way to go down but when I showed Felipe my approach today, he said it was correct. However, I used static field variables because I thought it would be easier to just access them without instantiating a new object. But using static field variables has a lot of negative side effects and is not recommended in this case! Felipe asked me to write a blog post about the pros and cons, so I’ll do that over the next few days. 