---
title: How to safely use third party APIs
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2
category: apprenticeship
---

We have a visitor from the States today (in fact we have two visitors but I'll only talk about one of them in this post...): Dave Moore, Director of Software Services at 8th Light in LA. 

<!--break-->

He's in Europe because he's speaking at a conference in Spain later this week. But today he needed some guinea pigs to practise his talk with and we, the apprentices, were so lucky as to benefit from this! Win-win situation. 

It was a mix of a talk and workshop. The topic was how to make your software more resilient when integrating third party code, like for example when working with an API. 

He told us that it's not enough to trust that the API will work as expected or as the documentation says. It's important to put some safety measures in place so that unexpected behaviour or outages have minimal impact on our own application. 

One of these measures is to make sure that the return data always has the correct format. E.g. if you're expecting a JSON object, make sure that you confirm that it really is a JSON object before you let your code use it. And, if necessary, we should normalise the response ourselves. 

It is also important not to let the third party interface leak throughout your codebase. Dave recommended not to use the third party's naming conventions throughout our code. Because what if they change? It will break our application and we might have to change it in a lot of different places throught the code.

Also, Dave suggested to check how long API requests take. If there is the odd request that takes longer than usual, it is better to cancel it and make a new one. It might be faster. However it's important to note that this only works with idempotent services. 

I sound like I know what I'm talking about when I use this fancy word, don't I? In fact, I only learnt the meaning of it during the workshop this afternoon. 

An idempotent service always returns the same thing, no matter how many times it is called. So how can a service be non-idempotent? For example if it increments a counter every time it is called. Then the counter will be different every time.  

That talk was really useful and interesting. I hadn't really thought about any of these things before. That said, I haven't seriously worked with third party APIs either.

After the talk we participated in a workshop. Dave had written an API with a few quirks and we were supposed to figure out how to get around them. Most of us worked in teams. Unfortunately our team didn't get that far because we couldn't really figure out how to test API calls with JavaScript, our language of choice for this project. We were excited by the idea of using a test double for the server (seeing that the FakeConsole test double was so kind to me) but this time it was all a bit confusing. 

Nonetheless it was a really interesting presentation and workshop where I feel like I learnt a lot. Thank you very much, Dave!