---
title: Test it! Even if it's not there.
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 1
category: apprenticeship
---

How do you test something that doesn't exist? Today I found out how.

<!--break-->

One of my stories for this week was to test drive an echo server in Java. An echo server is an application that takes input and then echos it back out. In my particular case it is an application that takes user input from the console and then prints it to the console again.

It's not that difficult to just write the logic and get a working application. But how to test it when we don't have user input?

Luckily the wonderful Maël volunteered to help me with it. It turned out that we spent almost the whole afternoon on it and her help was amazing! She explained everything so well that I went from “I don’t get this at all” to “ahhhh yes!!”.

So, to test something that isn't there you have to pretend it is there. You can create a class that acts as a test double and fakes the user input.

Maël showed me to start with the method that writes to the console. For that we needed to create a FakeConsole class that pretends to write something to the console. In reality it just calls a method that sets a field variable to the string that would normally be printed to the console. And then we were able to check if that variable equals the string that we passed to the print method.

It took me a while to get the hang of this but it finally made sense.

And then we did something similar for the method that reads from the console. Again, we don't actually use the Java Scanner class that reads from the console. Instead we create another method in the FakeConsole class that returns the input we pass in.

Tomorrow I'm planning to implement the real console class and an interface that implements both the fake and the real class. I will then need to create another class, which will contain the main method and instantiates the Echo Server object and pass it the real or the fake console, depending on if it's for testing or for real use.

The theory seems ok. Let’s see how I go with the implementation...