---
title: SOLID principles & Prime Factors kata
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 1
category: apprenticeship
---

Our daily morning lesson was a recap on the SOLID principles.

<!--break-->

SOLID stands for

- _S_ ingle responsibility
- _O_ pen/closed principle
- _L_ iskov substitution principle
- _I_ nterface segregation principle
- _D_ ependency injection principle

The idea is to write code following these principles to make the code base easier to maintain and extend.

Over the last weeks, the craftsmen held a morning lesson on each individual principle. Unfortunately I missed those because I only joined the company this week, so I really need to read up on them. I have a vague idea about some of them and have tried to follow the single responsibility principle for example. However some of the other principles are not as clear to me.

In the afternoon I started going through the Prime Factors kata in Java. I've got Uncle Bob's slides which show how the algorithm is test driven step by step. My task is to study this and type it out, making regular git commits for each step. The goal is to be able to perform the kata without referencing the slides.

I thought it would be a relatively easy task but it almost took me the whole afternoon to really understand what each line of code was doing. I tried to make small commits and be very descriptive in each commit message. I thought if I forced myself to verbalise what the code does, I will hopefully understand it better. I think if I hadn't approached it that way, I might have brushed over some details without understanding them. 

I ended up having 25 commits which is a lot for such a small kata and would need to be rebased in real life coding, but I'll leave it as it is for my learning purposes.

And tonight I went to Codebar for the first time in 10 weeks! It was actually really relaxing to teach HTML and CSS... A nice contrast to go back to something I know pretty well before going back to the unfamiliar syntax of Java tomorrow.