---
title: The first day at 8th Light
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 1
category: apprenticeship
---

Today was my first day as a resident apprentice at 8th Light. And it was fantastic! I don't think I've ever been made to feel so welcome in any job that I've had before.

<!--break-->

Of course it helped that I knew pretty much everyone there from events and from spending time with the team on a few Friday afternoons over the summer. 

The day began with the regular stand up and a teaching sesssion about code smells. Felipe, one of the craftsmen presented this lesson and helped us understand what code smells are and why we have them. 

After lunch I had an introductory meeting about the company, its mission and values. I was given a list of skills and coding practises for which I had to rate myself. I feel like I'm really lacking in testing skills and design skills, so I scored myself pretty low on those. As a result of that I promptly had a book about Test Driven Development and a book about Extreme programming on my desk (both by Kent Beck), which I'll be reading over the next weeks. 

And then came the big surprise during my first iteration meeting. Jim, my mentor, told me that I'd be learning Java! I fully expected that I'd be starting with Ruby, maybe continuing with my Tic Tac Toe application or working on a different problem. But no! Apparently it's not that easy to understand certain programming concepts when using Ruby, because Ruby hides those. While they're all apparent in Java. 

When Jim told me the news, I tried to not look too suprised, but I think the colour must have drained from my face, so that probably gave it away.

Well, you don't learn if you don't step out of your comfort zone! And learning is what I'm here for. If I wanted to be comfortable I could have just stayed in my old job.