---
title: SOLID - Liskov Substitution Principle
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 1.5
category: apprenticeship
---

Today I researched the Liskov Substitution Principle (LSP) and will summarise my understanding of it in this blog post.

<!--break-->

The LSP is the only one of the SOLID principles that is named after the person who is known for developing it - the American computer scientist Barbara Liskov. She and Jeanette Wing wrote about it for the first time in 1994. It doesn’t seem quite fair that only Barbara got her name mentioned. Liskov-Wing substitution principle has a nice ring to it, too! Oh well, too late now, I guess.

The principle states that functions that use references to base classes must be able to use objects of derived classes without knowing it. Or put in a different way, subtypes must be substitutable for their base types. 

Somehow I assumed that this was the only way to do it anyway. I mean, if a class inherits from another class, then it should be able to implement all the methods and probably a few more. So, if we replace the child class with the parent class, any methods that are called on it should still work. 

An example for a violation of this principle that I came across quite a few times is the relationship between a rectangle and a square. If we have a Rectangle class, it would be easy to think that a Square class can inherit from the Rectangle class, seeing that a square is a kind of rectangle. However, the Rectangle class has two methods: `setWidth()` and `setHeight()`, which the Square class would inherit. But the width and the height of the square are the same. So if it has two separate methods for each, this could result in unexpected behaviour.

Another example that I quite liked was related to birds. Let’s say there is a Bird class with the method `fly()`. Makes sense, doesn’t it? And then all birds can inherit from it, for example kingfisher, goldfinch, ostrich… hang on, ostrich? It can’t fly! So this violates the LSP. There should instead be a class of flying birds, for example. 

To summarise: if classes inherit from another class, it should be possible to substitute the base class with the child class without breaking any of the methods that are called on it. 



