---
title: Java build tools - Gradle and Maven
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 3
category: apprenticeship
---

One of my tasks this week was to research Maven and Gradle with the aim of deciding which one to use for my next project. Maven and Gradle are both build tools for Java. Previously I've been using IntelliJ to compile the code and run the tests but for my code to be easily shareable with other developers who might not be using IntelliJ, I need to manage dependencies with a build tool.

<!--break-->

During my online research into the tools I found many strongly opinionated articles about why Maven is better and similarly, why Gradle is better. Interesting, but it didn't really help me with my decision making. I guess it’s like that with a lot of technology decisions - a lot of people with a lot of strong opinions. Ultimately it  depends on the specific use case and on personal taste. 

I can imagine if you’re working with a larger and more complex application, it could be that one or the other tool has limitations. But I assume for my purpose, both are probably fine.

I also asked my colleagues for their opinion and again, I'd get as many different opinions as the number of people I asked.

So how to decide for one? Here’s my thought process.

Let's start with the facts.

##What the internet says about Maven vs. Gradle

###Maven

- has been around for longer

- therefore has more documentation and a larger community

- is more opinionated than Gradle (you have to do things the "Maven way")

- has a lot of plugins

- the build configuration file is written in XML

###Gradle

- is newer than Maven 

- the community is consequently not as big as the Maven user community

- is the standard for Android development

- is more flexible than Maven

- does not have as many plugins as Maven has

- Gradle is using a domain specific language (DSL) as a build language which looks more straight forward than XML

- the DSL allows the user to actually write logic in the build file and is therefore a lot more powerful than Maven's XML

- has a wrapper which you can use so that anyone can compile and run the code without having Gradle installed

##What my colleagues say about Maven vs. Gradle

- Maven is used in most older projects and you'll find Gradle in more recent projects

- Gradle is used in hipster projects

- Maven is better as it standardises the usage because it is so opinionated

- Gradle is better because it's more state-of-the-art

- Maven is a bit easier to use than Gradle

- approach it chronologically - start with Maven and then use Gradle for the next project


##Trying out both

To help form my own opinion on each tool, I decided to try them out. I followed some quick tutorials to set up a project with both build tools. Both were fine, to be honest. Ultimately both are new to me and I'd need to get used to either, no matter which one I choose. Gradle reminds me a bit more of the JavaScript task runners that I'm familiar with but other than that, it's all new to me.

I liked that Maven had the option to use an archetype, which is kind of like a template that generates a basic structure to begin with. I also found that the XML language wasn't as confusing as I thought it would be. 

When I was following the Gradle tutorial I realised that it was referring to the MavenCentral repository of plugins. So it seems like Gradle builds on Maven or at least uses Maven assets. Another pro argument for using Maven is that I heard that a lot of Java projects follow the Maven project structure as a standard. 

##The decision

That's why I decided to start with Maven and use that for my next project. Once I know it a bit better, hopefully it will make it easier to use Gradle, which I'm planning to use for a future project.
 
