---
title: Helping out at Code First&#58; Girls
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2
category: apprenticeship
---

Tonight I helped out at Code First: Girls, an organisation that teaches women how to code. Two of the 8th Light craftsmen, Christoph and Felipe, held a workshop on Git basics. They needed teaching assistants to help with the coding sessions, so I went along together with some of my apprentice colleagues. 

<!--break-->

It was  a lot of fun. I always like meeting women who are keen on learning how to code. Probably because I see myself in them a little bit. And I'm so happy with my decision to change careers and become a developer, that I want everyone else to do the same! So I try to help and encourage beginners as much as I can.

The Git workshop consisted of a presentation of some basic Git commands, with some coding session in between, where the participants were supposed to try the commands. I had seen the workshop presentation on Friday afternoon already, when Felipe and Christoph practised it in front of me. The presentation introduced some commands like git clone, git status, git branch etc which I felt were really very basic. I was almost tempted to suggest to go into more detail and introduce some other commands.

However, tonight it turned out that a lot of the girls were struggling with using the command line and remembering which Git command did what. There seemed to be a lot more confusion about it than I had expected. 

And that reminded me of how I felt when I first learnt Git. It was a scary thing that I only dared to use with the few standard commands that I had written down in my Evernote. Anything else just seemed way too risky to try. And until I actually worked with other people on a code project, I never really understood the purpose of branching.

That made me think about two things. Firstly, how far I’ve come since my beginnings of coding. I still pretty much consider myself a beginner but clearly, I'm at a different beginner level now.  

Secondly, it made me realise how easy it is to forget what it’s like when you’re first learning something. And I find when teaching it’s really important to have that kind of empathy and to be able to put yourself in their shoes.

I really enjoy teaching beginners and I want to keep that empathy as much as I can because I hope it makes me a better teacher. So how do I manage not to forget the initial struggles? I guess continuing to teach beginners as much as I can will help. Be it at Code First: Girls or Codebar or any other opportunity. 