---
title: What I learnt from performing the Roman Numerals kata
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 3
category: apprenticeship
---

Last week I did a screen recording of my performance of the Roman Numerals kata. Felipe reviewed it during my IPM on Monday and gave me some feedback that I will try to implement. I also watched the video again and tried to identify further areas for improvement.

<!--break-->

Here's the list of improvements:

##Use more keyboard shortcuts

As a developer, we should use the keyboard as much as possible, as using the mouse slows us down. Although that is only true, if all the shortcuts are in your muscle memory and you don’t need to think about them anymore. And how do the shortcuts get into your muscle memory? By using them all the time. 

I have to admit that I used the mouse for certain operations during the kata performance. For example I clicked the green play button to run the tests. I had looked up the keyboard shortcut `ctrl + shift + R` but it confused me that the shortcut only ran one test at a time. So I didn’t bother with it anymore and went back to using the mouse. 

After the feedback from Felipe I tried the shortcut again and finally figured out that it runs the test on which the cursor is currently on. And to run all the tests, you need to put the cursor at the top of the file. 

I’ve taken this on board for my Coin Changer kata performance and will use the vim shortcut `gg` to go to the top of the file, `ctrl + shift+ R` to run all the test and then the vim shortcut `G` to go back to the bottom and add a new test (with the IntelliJ shortcut `ctrl + enter`).

Another shortcut that I have started using more is `alt + tab` to jump between the two IntelliJ tabs. In the screen recording I sometimes used the mouse to click into another tab because the shortcut felt a bit awkward but I guess it’s just a matter of getting used to it.

I’ve also been using the mouse to right-click on a tab of an open file in IntelliJ to split the window, so that I could have the test file on the left and the code file on the right. Felipe showed me the vim shortcut  `ctrl + w + v`, which does the same thing and also works in IntelliJ because I am using the vim plugin.

##Change existing code rather than writing new code

There is a step in the Roman Numerals kata where I have several if statements that can be replaced by a while loop. The way I’m going about the implementation is to copy another while loop and change the values in it. However, Felipe noticed that it would have been easier to change the “if" into a “while” in one of the existing if statements. Not only is it easier, but it also makes it clearer how the tests help to transform the code - going from specific to more generic. There's a blog post by Uncle Bob about how certain elements in the code transform as the code becomes more generic. And one of the examples is that if statements transform to while loops. So from now on I’ll try to make these transformations more obvious when performing a kata. 

##Don’t delete code too early

During the Roman Numerals kata screen recording I implemented a while loop to replace several if statements. Once I had written the code for the while loop I then delete the if statements and run the tests again. Felipe advised me that I should run the tests first and only delete the old code if the tests are green. This won't work for every kata but in this case it worked because the arabic number is decreased in every loop and the if statements only run if the arabic number is greater than a certain number. By the time the arabic number gets to the old if statements, it is already zero, so the if statements won't run.

##Increase font-size

When watching my screen recording on iPlayer on my laptop, I thought it was easy to see the font. However, when I uploaded the video to YouTube, I realised that the font was a bit too small. So next time I do a screen recording, I will zoom in a bit to make the font more legible. 

##No need for git commits

During each IPM my mentors asked me to make many small commits. So I also made these small commits during the screen recording. However, it’s not necessary to record commits. I’ll skip those for my next recording. The commits were actually a bit distracting and I think without them it'll be easier to perform a kata.

Felipe's feedback was really useful and I’ll try to keep all the above mentioned points in mind for my performance of the Coin Changer kata on Friday. Especially the keyboard shortcuts! 