---
title: The benefits of pair programming
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 1
category: apprenticeship
---

This morning I started my day by pairing with the lovely Jarkyn, a fellow 8th Light apprentice. It was really useful for me because she knows Java and explained some basics that had completely baffled me before. 

<!--break-->

And she also showed me some more shortcuts for both vim and IntelliJ. 

It made me realise just how beneficial it is to pair with others. I can sit here and muddle along and get by. But I'm not aware that I'm doing things in an inefficient way. You don't know what you don't know, right?

A good example is my way of adding text on a new line in vim. I had gotten into the habit of  pressing `$` to go to the end of a line, then pressing `a` to go into insert mode after the line and then hitting `enter` to create a new line. It was fine for me and it was already in my muscle memory. 

But it is much easier to just hit `o`. One key to achieve exactly the same thing! I vaguely remember reading about it before during my research when I first started using vim a few weeks ago. But I forget things... and started using my roundabout way of adding a new line.

Another example is the IntelliJ shortcut `Ctrl + enter` which Jarkyn showed me. It displays a list of available intention actions. I was perfectly happy to type out one JUnit test after the next and probably wouldn't have even questioned having to do that. But now that I know I can just used `Ctrl + enter` to get my template for the next test, I'm saving many key strokes. 

Conclusion of the story: I need to do more pair programming!