---
title: How I tamed my application
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 1.5
category: apprenticeship
---

Today I spent the morning practising the Coin Changer kata over and over again and also did a screen recording of it. We’re all supposed to record a kata and as my last attempt of the Roman Numerals kata was a bit difficult to see due to the small font size, I thought I’d just record the Coin Changer kata instead. This time it's more legible.

<!--break-->

In the afternoon I continued working on my Rock, Paper, Scissors game in Java. It is so much fun to work on a slightly larger (compared to the katas) application again and figure out how to make it all work. The hours fly by almost too quickly. I also really enjoy discovering a new language and researching how to use it. 

##Test doubles

I implemented test doubles again. One for the console, similarly to how I did it for the echo server application. And the other double I implemented for the random generator of moves that the computer player uses. It randomly chooses rock, paper or scissors. But it is hard to test something if you don’t know what it returns. So I implemented a FakeRandomizer class which I use for the tests. And when that class is used, I can tell the computer player which move to use. I connected the fake and the real randomizer classes through an interface and can now use either of the classes for the computer player.


##Enums

Yesterday, Felipe gave me the tip to look at Enums and see how I can use them for this application. I did some research and came to the conclusion that Enums are something like constants which are born in their separate little area of my application. A little bit like a class. 


I had originally used strings for the options rock, paper and scissors but then changed those throughout my application to Enums. I had to make a change in almost every file. But I think, if an Enum changes, IntelliJ will be able to automatically change it across all files if I use the magic shortcut `shift + F6` to change the variable. So if I need to change the options for some reason, it should be a lot more straight forward. At least that's what Maël told me. She helped me a little with this and explained that strings live in the wild but Enums are a bit tamer.

I’m glad I’ve tamed my application a little bit. 