---
title: SOLID - Single responsibility principle
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2
category: apprenticeship
---

Last week we did a recap of the SOLID principles in our daily morning lesson. And as I’m not terribly familiar with every one of these principles, I thought I’d write a blog post about each of them over the next few weeks. This will force me to research the principles more in depth. And writing about them will hopefully mean that I’ll internalise the meaning better.

<!--break-->

So today I’ll start with the single responsibility principle.

The single responsibility principle pretty much does what it says on the tin. It says that every class or method should just do one thing, i.e. have one single responsibility. 

But what exactly is a responsibility?

Uncle Bob, who came up with the SOLID principles in the first place, defines a responsibility as a reason to change. So a class or a module should only have one reason to change. 

I'll try to find an example for this principle.

Let's use the Tic Tac Toe game application that I wrote several weeks ago in Ruby. I tried to adhere to the single responsibility  principle as much as I was able to. So for example, I have a class that only deals with presenting the user interface. And I have another class which implements the game flow, e.g. it knows when the game is over or who’s turn it is. 

And in the beginning, I think I had implemented it so that if the game was over, the game flow class will print “Game over” directly to the screen. Just a little shortcut along those lines. But that was bad code because the game flow class should only be concerned with things that relate to the set up and organisation of the game but not with printing things to the screen. So I changed it. 

Why should we adhere to this principle? 

The reason is that the codebase is a lot easier to maintain if the classes have clear responsibilities and don’t overlap. Say, for example, I wanted to change the message “Game over” to display “The Game is over” instead. I don’t want to go into the game flow class and possibly break a few tests or even break some other functionality by changing it around. 

Another reason for adhering to this principle is when working in teams. It could be that one developer needs to change all game notifications to the user and another developer is working on changing the game flow logic. If I didn’t keep these two in separate classes the likelihood of git merge conflicts increases and subsequently makes collaborating more difficult.  

While I was researching the single responsibility principle, I also came across a downside of it. Apparently it's possible to overuse it, so to have too many separate classes or modules when it's not necessary. That would be premature optimisation which is a bad, bad thing.

So I guess, as with everything in life, it's always good to use common sense. Keep this principle in mind but not dogmatically use it on everything and anything if it doesn't make sense.