---
title: Patch with ETag
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 3
category: apprenticeship
---


The next test that I worked on had the catchy name “Patch with ETag”.

<!--break-->

## Test description

A PATCH request is used when an existing resource needs to be updated partially. And according to HTTP 1.1 specifications, a PATCH request needs to send an encoded version of the resource that it is trying to update, to make sure that the resource on the server is the same as expected.
Otherwise it could happen that another client has made a request before, changed the resource and then it all becomes a mess basically.

The cob spec test first makes a GET request to one of the files in the directory and expects the content to be returned in the response body. That part of the test is already green because I implemented this behaviour for a previous test. Then the test sends a PATCH request and expects a 204 response. The content of the file should be updated during the PATCH request but the response doesn’t return any content.

And when it makes a GET request again, the response body should return the updated file content.

## Implementation

First I added a new response method for a PATCH request into the existing AssetController. For now I’m just returning the status line, which meets the test requirement about the 204 response.

Cool, it satisfied this aspect of the test but the implementation was just superficial. What should actually happen is that the file gets updated with the request body content.

I felt that the controller should delegate that task to the directory object, like this:

<pre><code class="language-java">
@Override
public HttpResponse doPatch(HttpRequest request) {
    directory.updateFile(request.requestLine().route(), request.body());
    return new HttpResponse(NO_CONTENT);
}
    
</code></pre>

So once I'd implemented this code, the test passed! The file content was updated and it returned that updated file content in the following GET request. Although I completely ignored the Etag part of it. So I should probably implement a little check to see if the Etag is correct before I update the file content. 

In fact, maybe I should raise a PR to the cob spec and enhance that test with an expectation that the content does not get updated when the Etag isn't correct. But then, do I really want to torture my apprentice colleagues with an even more complex test? Nooo... I better not. 

For now I'll implement the ETag check anyway, because that's how I understand the code is supposed to work.

And again I was asking myself the question: whose responsibility was it? Should the AssetController only ask the directory to update the file if the ETag is correct? Or should the AssetController always ask the directory to update but the directory then decides if the ETag is correct or not. 

I could imagine that in future I'll use the `directory.updateFile` method for something else that doesn't have an ETag. So it's maybe better to keep that method generic and not let it get involved in any ETag checking. 

And the controllers are usually the most specific implementations for the individual requests, so I'll let the AssetController take over the responsiblity of checking if the ETag is correct.

I'll add an if-condition to the doPatch method. A new class, the EntityTagChecker can confirm if it is the right ETag or not. I'll pass the existing file content and the ETag from the request headers into the method.

<pre><code class="language-java">
@Override
    public HttpResponse doPatch(HttpRequest request) {
        if (EntityTagChecker.isCorrectTag(directory.contentOfFile(request.requestLine().uri()), request.requestHeaders().get("If-Match"))) {
            directory.updateFile(request.requestLine().route(), request.body());
        }
        return new HttpResponse(NO_CONTENT);
    }
</code></pre>

To implement the method which compares the ETag with the existing Sha1 encoded content, I was researching online how to convert a string to Sha1. There seems to be an Apache Commons Code library that does the job. But I'm not supposed to use any libraries other than the standard Java ones.

So I guess I'll just use a different code snippet. Luckily Stackoverflow provides me with help. Although if I just use an existing code snippet, I might as well have used the Apache Commons library. Oh well, it's not really a main feature of the application, so probably not that big a deal. I don't think I need to study Sha1 hex encoding in detail. And I've written a test for the code so that I know it behaves correctly. So I think I can trust the code snippet.

Anyway, it is all working fine and now I've completed my iteration! About two days ahead of time. Designing the application in the way I've done it now really makes it very easy to implement new features. My estimates were a lot higher than necessary. Even when factoring in these blog posts.

But I still have two tests left in the cob spec. The next one I will work on is the Partial Content test. And the last one that is failing is the one where my server code receives 1500 simultaneous requests and should return a GET response to all of them in under 5 seconds. 

I am using pretty much the same implementation for the threading that I had with my first HTTP server, where the test passed. So I have to find out why this one doesn't pass now. So annoying!