---
title: What is idiomatic code?
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2
category: apprenticeship
---

I just had a little Slack discussion with Felipe about idiomatic Elixir. Which led to the question “what makes idiomatic code idiomatic”? Felipe suggested that this might make for an interesting blog post and seeing that I was still looking for a topic for today’s post, I thought I might as well indulge him.

<!--break-->

I think it’s quite an interesting question. Since I've started coding I've been hearing the word “idiomatic” all the time. Everyone always strives to write a language in an "idiomatic" way. I don’t think I ever used the word before. Although the word can describe both a programming language and a natural (human) language. But I've never heard anyone say that they're trying to speak English in an idiomatic way.

When used with regards to a natural language "idiomatic" means “using, containing or denoting expressions that are natural to a native speaker” or “peculiar to or characteristic of a language”.

I think especially the latter definition can help explain what it means in relation to a programming language. 

From what I gather it means that you use features and constructs of a particular programming language to its fullest. And you try to use as many features of the language that are unique to that particular language as possible. 

As always you can achieve the same thing in many different ways. But to make it idiomatic you should not use a way that is generic and would probably work in other languages too. Instead you should write code using the special language constructs or features that distinguish the language from others.

Here’s an example. If you wanted to print the numbers of 1 to 10 in Java, you could do something like this.

<pre><code class="language-java">
 for (int i = 0; i <= 10; i++) {
     System.out.println(i);
 }

</code></pre>

And you could do something similar in Ruby.

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
i = 0
while i < 10 do
  puts i
  i += 1
end

</code></pre>

It works but it wouldn’t be idiomatic, because Ruby has it's own unique way of achieving the same outcome. This code would be more idiomatic Ruby.

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
(1..10).each {|i| puts i}

</code></pre>
