---
title: A day full of pairing
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 3
category: apprenticeship
---

Before I go into detail about all the pair programming related events today, I just wanted to mention my little success that I had yesterday:

After a few days of reading up on alpha-beta pruning and trying it out, I finally got it to work yesterday afternoon. And the computer calculates its moves so much faster! It really makes a huge difference.

<!--break-->

I was looking at several different blog posts about it and finally, one code example [in this post](https://www3.ntu.edu.sg/home/ehchua/programming/java/JavaGame_TicTacToe_AI.html) made it really clear in my head and I was able to implement it.  Yay!

Today I felt elated because all the stress and worry about alpha-beta pruning was gone. I ended up not working on any of my stories today but instead I pair programmed with others. 

Since yesterday the craftsmen have started to offer to us apprentices that we could pair with them which is really awesome. We had an apprentice retrospective last week and we mentioned that we would love to pair with the craftsmen more and it seems that they’ve taken that on board.

That’s why I love working for 8th Light… On my first day Jim told me that if there was anything that I felt could be improved, I should talk to him and make a suggestion on how to improve this. Of course, any company tells you this. But the companies I’ve worked for in the past would have never actually tried to make that change happen. And even if they had tried, it wouldn’t have been possible with all the politics and bureaucracy. But at 8th Light it seems that it is actually possible! We mention that we would like to pair with craftsmen and two days later, several of them are offering us to pair with them. It’s fantastic!

So this morning I paired with Skim on an internal Ruby project. We worked on a parser for a spreadsheet to be turned into a csv file with different columns. We tried  to do ping pong as much as it was possible without me knowing the code. At first I was super slow because I was struggling with vim shortcuts. I’m not used to using real vim, I only use the vim plug-in for IntelliJ, so mainly just use hjkl, u, y, p, d, x, b and that’s about it. So I couldn't really remember how to jump between windows and open files and jump to the terminal etc.

Also, whenever I pair with someone who I haven’t paired with before or who I know is a lot better than me, I get a bit nervous and forget how to type. An additional complication was that I was using a broken keyboard on which the delete button didn’t work! So if you forget how to type and try to delete it and that doesn’t work either… it was quite funny. I had to laugh about myself.

It was really good fun and it was so interesting to write a bit of code for a 'real' project. I’m glad that Skim agreed that I could pair with him.

And in the afternoon for 8LU, Georgina, Priya and I gave our talk on pair programming again. But this time Georgina and Priya didn’t do the demo of how to correctly pair programme, but we "voluntold" two members of the audience to do the demo: Daniel and Skim. And they ended up doing a hilarious show.

Emilie also gave a talk about her apprenticeship because it was her last day. She’ll be missed! I hope she’ll apply as a resident apprentice and come back but I’m not sure if she herself knows yet what she wants to do. 

Samir, one of our visitors, did a spontaneous lightning talk on vim shortcuts and we ended up asking him loads of questions, so I think the talk turned out to be longer than he expected.

My friend Sophie came as well and I chatted with her for a bit throughout the afternoon.

And for most of the afternoon I paired with Priya to create a website that pulls in her photos from Instagram, so she can have all her 100 photos in one place, kind of [like mine](/100-days-100-photos). Time flew and when I was thinking that I should be leaving the office soon, we accidentally wiped out one of Priya's existing Github repos, so there was some more excitement there… Ooops! Anyway, it was all fixed with Jarkyn’s help and then we went to the pub together.

It was such a fun day!