---
title: How to test data persistence
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2
category: apprenticeship
---

Yesterday I spent a few hours trying to figure out how I could test writing to a file without actually writing to a file.

<!--break-->

I did a little spike and figured out that this code writes data to a file:

`File.open(FILE_NAME, "w"){ |file| file.write(data.to_yaml)}`

I have a `Store` class which deals with the writing and reading to and from a file. So I thought I could inject the File class and in the test use a mock class instead. But I just could not for the life of me figure out how to mock the `File.open` method. 

And then I finally realised that this syntax means that the open method must yield a file. And inside the block, the file is being written to.

I hadn’t really used yield before other than for templates, so I think that’s why I didn’t make that connection sooner.

In the meantime I had explored alternative options. I thought that maybe I could inject the `IO` or `StringIO` class instead of the `File` class and then somehow access what was written to assert on it in the test. But neither of these classes have the same methods on them as `File`.

Rspec has its own mocking syntax as well. I considered using the below instead of creating my own mocks.

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
  it "persists data in a yaml file" do
    fake_file = FakeContactsFile.new
    store = Store.new(fake_file)
    file = StringIO.new
    expect(File).to receive(:open).with("contacts_store.yml", "w").and_yield(file)
    expect(file).to receive(:write).with("--- contact data\n...\n")
    store.persist("contact data")
  end

</code></pre>

But it would have been a lot less flexible to use the inbuilt mocks. This is just a basic example but I think once the logic gets more complicated, it might have limitations. I also think it’s a bit confusing when reading the tests, that you call the expectation statements first and then the actual method. And then of course I remember what happened when I suggested using the Mockito framework for Java.

So I thought it was better to write my own mocks.

Below is a description of how my tests work now that I’ve figured out how to mock the `File` class. 

I have a `MockFileSystem` which has an `open` method that yields a file.

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
class MockFileSystem
  def initialize(file)
    @file = file
  end

  def open(file_name, action)
    yield file
  end

  private

  attr_reader :file
end


</code></pre>

And the file that is yielded is an instance of the `MockFile` class.

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
class MockFile
  attr_reader :data

  def initialize
    @data = nil
  end

  def write(data)
    @data = [data]
  end
end

</code></pre>

And in my tests I can now use these two mock classes and pretend to my tested class that this is the real File. And it doesn't even notice. Hah!

This is (a simplified version of) the method in the Store class that I want to test:

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
class Store
  def persist(new_data)
    contacts_file.open("contacts_store.yml", "w"){ |file| file.write(new_data.to_yaml)}
  end
end

</code></pre>
And this is the test using my mocks.

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
describe Store do
  it "persists data as an array in yaml format" do
    mock_file = MockFile.new
    store = Store.new(MockFileSystem.new(mock_file))
    store.persist("test data")
    expect(mock_file.data).to eq ["---\n- test data\n"]
  end
end

</code></pre>

And it works!
