---
title: Blogging New Years resolutions
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2
category: apprenticeship
---

On Saturday I met up with my friend Sophie, a fellow GA bootcamp survivor. She was in the same cohort as me and we have regular catch-ups to discuss the ups and downs of a newbie coders’ life.

<!--break-->

She asked me how I was enjoying my new job and I said I loved it. Of course I do. It’s great to be coding all day and working on things that I know will make me a better developer. And to learn best practises and work with cool people from all over the world (I love being part of an international team. It’s a bit like travelling without having to take time off work).

Anyway, there was one thing, I told Sophie, that I didn’t really like so much: the daily apprenticeship blog post.

And Sophie said: but I thought you liked writing!

Hm… she’s right, I also thought I liked writing. I’ve blogged about my GA bootcamp progress and really enjoyed that. And I have my travel and photography blog which - although it is a bit neglected at the moment (too much coding, not enough travelling) - I like posting to. So why don’t I enjoy writing the daily apprenticeship blog post?

While I was trying to explain that to Sophie, I realised that the main reason is that I feel like I can’t really write the way I normally do. I normally try to write something funny or be a bit witty (yes, I try, give me a break!). But for work, I felt like I needed to be more serious. You know, talk about code and technical subjects in a professional (read: "dry") way.

And Sophie said: but why are you doing this?! (She should be a consultant... asking all the whys). And I thought, I don’t really know! I thought I had to! And she said in her French accent: "but no! You don’t have to!" The French… they’ve always been such rebels!

To be honest, the other reason that I don’t really enjoy writing the blog post is that I often leave the blog post until the evening. So I’d be working on my stories during the day and then, when I felt like I’d probably like to get on my black wire-donkey (that’s an endearing term to refer to a bicycle in German) and navigate the death traps that are the streets of London to finally get home and plant my bum on the sofa, I would remember... ahh.. that blog post. OK, just write something quickly. What did I do today? Ah yes, that. OK. Done. Bye!

I read Maël's blog again today and it’s so funny and so personal. She said she wasn’t writing it for any audience but just for herself. And that it’s totally ok to not be dry and technical. I mean, she’s still here; she hasn't been kicked out of the apprenticeship for being funny and writing in a light-hearted way. 

So. Therefore I decided that my resolutions to make blogging more fun again will be:

- From now on I’ll write in the style that I enjoy writing in

- I’ll write my blog post just before or after lunch and not just before I go home