---
title: Directory links and listings
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 3
category: apprenticeship
---


There are two tests in the cob spec which refer to the content of the directory that is passed in as an argument when starting the server jar: DirectoryLinks and DirectoryListings.

<!--break-->

The DirectoryListings test expects the response body to contain a list of all the files in the directory. And the DirectoryLinks test expects the same, except that each file name is wrapped in an HTML anchor tag with the href pointing to the path of each file.

I’m not quite sure why these are two separate tests really because I think that if the DirectoryLinks test passes, the DirectoryListings test will pass as well.

So I’ll focus on the DirectoryLinks test. It makes a request to the root route and expects links to all the files in the directory. It doesn’t say anything about the response status line or headers, so I assume it’ll be a 200 OK.

In terms of my code design, I’m thinking it would definitely be good to have a Directory object that other objects can ask for its contents. I don’t have a Directory class yet, so I’ll need to create it. But where should the Directory object be instantiated? 

I’ve already got an existing implementation which uses the directory contents. This is when the AssetController is configured by the router. The router looks inside the directory and then registers the AssetController for each file path. So that means I'd have to instantiate the Directory in Main so I can pass it into the `router.configure()` method.

I don't know, I just have a bad feeling about doing too many things in Main because you can’t test it. But then what I'm doing is just instantiating a new object from a class that will be fully tested. So I guess it's ok.

I’ll start by refactoring the existing code. Currently it is the Router’s responsibility to go through each file in the directory and find the full path for it. It would be better if the Router could just ask a Directory object to return all file paths.

The problem is now that I’m not sure how to pass a Directory object into the `router.configure()` method, because at the moment it can only take a String and a new Controller. A solution would be to create a second configure() method in the Router class which can take a Directory and a Controller.

Alternatively I could pass the directory into the Router but I think having a second configure() method is a more targeted approach. Not every method in the Router needs the directory, so it's not necessary for it to be a field variable.

Currently the configure method in the Router class looks like this. It checks if the incoming route is a directory, does some directory file reading and then registers a controller for each individual file path. If the route is not a directory, it registers the controller with the given route.

<pre><code class="language-java">
public void configure(String route, Controller controller) {
        if (isDirectory(route)) {
            try {
                registerControllerForFiles(route, controller);
            } catch (IOException e) {
                throw new FileException();
            }
        }
        controllersForRoutes.put(route, controller);
    }

</code></pre>

This method should be changed. Firstly because it does two things. And secondly because it's not quite right that the parameter called route sometimes is not a route but a directory. That's a bit dodgy. So there we have another argument for creating a second configure method that specifically deals with a directory. And then the first configure method can just deal with routes.

After refactoring my code in that way, the AssetController is configured in the Router together with the Directory object. This is the related line of code in the Main class.

<pre><code class="language-java">
router.configure(directory, new AssetController(directory, new ContentStorage()));

</code></pre>

I configure all other controllers by passing in the corresponding route as a string. I guess that's ok... the AssetController is just a bit different! Here are some examples of how the other controllers are configured in the router:

<pre><code class="language-java">
router.configure("/", new RootController());
router.configure("/form", new FormController(new ContentStorage()));
router.configure("/method_options", new MethodOptionsController());

</code></pre>

OK, so that was refactoring of existing code. Now I need to start implementing the response for the DirectoryLinks test. In fact, the response is actually an enhancement to a response that I've already got. 

As you can see above, I already have a RootController. So I need to extend the GET response method in that controller to include the links to all files in the body. I'm thinking, something like this: 


<pre><code class="language-java">
@Override
public HttpResponse doGet(HttpRequest request) {
    return new HttpResponse(OK, directory.linksToAllFiles());
}

</code></pre>

BUT: Should the directory generate HTML? Maybe that's violating the SRP once again. I think the directory should definitely return all file names and file paths. But I'm really not sure about the HTML bit. 

Maybe it's better to create another class. A `LinkGenerator`? It could probably have a static method called 'generate' that takes the href and the anchor text as strings. In fact, it would probably need to take a Map as an argument with href and anchor text as a key value pair, so that it knows which href belongs to which anchor. It would look like this:

<pre><code class="language-java">
@Override
    public HttpResponse doGet(HttpRequest request) {
        return new HttpResponse(OK, LinkGenerator.generate(directory.filesWithRelativePaths()).getBytes());
    }

</code></pre>

And it works!

