---
title: IPM and plan for the next weeks
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 1
category: apprenticeship
---

I just had my IPM where I demoed my newly created 4x4 board game option and my unbeatable player. Deja-vu! Kind of - except that I’ve written it in Elixir this time.

<!--break-->

Unfortunately my code didn’t quite work though. The minimax was working fine but it was really slow, so I decided to implement alpha-beta pruning as well in the hope that it would be faster. Well… it wasn’t. I tried to debug it but only came so far as to see that my code never seemed to hit the option that makes it break out of the loop early. But I didn’t manage to fix it in time for the IPM.

So Felipe and Jim asked me to start again with the minimax algorithm. Probably best seeing that the current code is quite long and I can’t really figure out where the bug is. This time they gave me some constraints, including function length (no longer than 10 lines), module length (no longer than 100 lines) and they asked me to use if/else statement as little as possible. The constraints don’t seem too bad luckily.

## The end is in sight

Today I also asked if they thought I was still on track for finishing my apprenticeship in mid-July and they said yes! So it seems like my review board on 15 July is pretty much set in stone now (I guess unless I mess up majorly on one of the upcoming tasks). Very scary but exciting at the same time! Only 6.5 weeks left to my challenges.

But first I’ll have to tackle the HTTP server in a couple of weeks' time. While I’m feeling a bit apprehensive of it, I’m actually looking forward to writing code for something completely new that I’ve never done before. I’m feeling a bit Tic Tac Toe fatigued, to be honest. So an HTTP server will make a nice change. Of course I also expect that I will tear my hair out and bang my head against the wall but we’ll see. I’m trying to keep calm and just see it as another mini-review board, just like the one I had for my Ruby ConMan.

Right, better get started with my minimax take 2!