---
title: The Unix philosophy
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2.5
category: apprenticeship
---

In my IPM last week, Felipe noticed my complete lack of understanding of anything Unix related. I can just about enter some commands into the terminal to navigate around files and folders, move and remove them. But for anything else I have to rely on StackOverflow which can sometimes be a bit scary.

<!--break-->

So Jim and Felipe recommend that I should read up on useful Unix commands and on the Unix philosophy. And that I should write blog posts on both.

I thought I’d start with the Unix philosophy as it’s a bit higher level and hopefully help me to understand the general context before diving into the documentation about commands.

The first thing I learnt was that there *is* such a thing as the Unix philosophy… I had no idea!

And the more I read up on it, the more I liked it. I also saw a lot of similarities with the way we work here at 8th Light. Not everything is similar but a lot of it is.

Several articles online give a number of rules or principles, which the philosophy is based on. I read several times that (and I’m paraphrasing here) these rules aren’t made up by computer science theorists or by upper management type people but that they are grounded in experience and are highly pragmatic. Bottom-up rather than top-down. Music to my ears!

I found several lists online, with a varying number of rules, coined by a number of white men with varying degrees of beardedness (usually quite a high degree). I got the impression that the longer the rule book becomes, the more repetitive the rules are. As I understand it, the rules are mainly around simplicity and pragmatism.

One of the most important rules is “small is beautiful”. Small applications, small methods, small everything is good because it’s easier to understand, maintain and change. To be able to achieve this goal of small programs, they should be easily connectible to other programs, with simple interfaces that don’t contain any surprises.

All code written should be easy to reason about. It should not to be too clever but as simple as possible. Simpler algorithms should be chosen over more complicated ones. Clarity wins over cleverness. Sounds very familiar to me!

According to the Unix philosophy, every application’s interface should be a simple text stream. And every program should be written as a filter which takes a text stream as input, processes it and outputs another text stream.

Interestingly, rewriting an application with enhanced or different functionality is higher valued than modifying or enhancing an existing application. I guess it works if applications are kept very small and interfaces simple.

Another important aspect of the Unix philosophy is that software should be tried out early.  Ship early and often, so that feedback can be given as soon as possible. Another familiar principle for 8th Lighters!

Also, programs should be quiet if they have nothing to say. At first I didn’t really understand what this rule meant but I think it means that they shouldn’t produce any unnecessary console output. For example tests shouldn’t print anything to the console other than the name and failure messages.

Overall, some pretty good rules! Although I'm not sure how practical it is to constantly rewrite applications instead of enhancing them. Here at 8th Light I'm learning how to write applications so that they're easy to enhance and maintain, so I hadn't really thought about it in any different way. But I guess if you have a lot of really small modules that talk to each other, then it could work.