---
title: Re-learning Sinatra 
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 4
category: apprenticeship
---

Yesterday and today I learnt a lot of new things about Sinatra. I’d used it before when I was at GA but that was back in December 2014 and I couldn’t really remember much of it. Also I had never even thought of testing a Sinatra app before, so that was completely new for me.

<!--break-->

My task was to do a spike for a day and create an application that lets a user enter data on a page, click through to the next page, enter some more data and on the last page display all the data that the user added.

I looked at the Sinatra documentation and there are several test frameworks that can be used for it, including rspec. As I’d been using rspec for my other Ruby apps, I decided to stick with it.

To set up the tests for the routes, you need to add a few additional lines to your test file. You have to include the rack test methods and you have to create a new instance of your test class inside the `app` method.

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
ENV['RACK_ENV'] = 'test'

require_relative '../lib/introduction_app'
require 'rspec'
require 'rack/test'

describe 'IntroductionApp' do
  include Rack::Test::Methods

  def app
    IntroductionApp.new
  end

  # all tests go here
end

</code></pre>

With rspec testing you always start with describing the class that you want to test. So if I want to test the Sinatra routes, they need to be inside a class. I don't think I'd ever had my Sinatra routes inside a class before and I can tell you that just adding a class...? It just doesn’t work. 

The internet tells me that a class in Sinatra needs to inherit from Sinatra::Base. You require Sinatra as per usual but you need to implement the inheritance like this:

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
require 'sinatra'

class IntroductionApp < Sinatra::Base

  #all the routes are in here
end

</code></pre>

But after I did that, suddenly I couldn’t run the app on localhost anymore. When I entered `ruby filename.rb` into the console as I normally do to start a Sinatra app, the application started but I got an error from Sinatra saying that it couldn’t find the route. Argh! 

I tried so many things to resolve this issue! But after an hour or so of banging my head against the wall, I asked Georgina and she remembered that she ran the app differently. With the command `rackup`! And then it worked.

But my main learning from this spike was around the testing. Once I figured out how to do it, it didn't seem to difficult at all. Well, I guess that's the case with most things once you've figured them out.

## Testing that a page is displayed

For testing requests to routes, the wonderful rspec partnered up with rack test and prepared a lot of methods to make the developer's life easier.

Below are some examples. I'm showing the production code first, because I find it easier to explain how the tests work when we see _what_ we are testing first.

Here’s the method that I wrote to display the homepage. If the route “/“ is hit with a GET request, then it displays the template home.haml.

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
  get "/" do
    haml :home
  end

</code></pre>
The template has a heading which says “Welcome to IntroduceMANN”, so in my test I can assert that this string is returned from the server.

Below is the test that checks that the response is ok and that the body of the response (which contains all the html that makes up the web page) includes my heading.

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
  it "displays the homepage" do
    get '/'
    expect(last_response).to be_ok
    expect(last_response.body).to include("Welcome to IntroduceMANN")
  end

</code></pre>

(A little side note: my apprentice colleagues have recently started the trend of naming their apps with the suffix “man”. I had to jump on the band wagon of course but I gave it a German twist to make it more exotic. Except that my colleagues thought it sounded Jamaican. Hahaha!)

## Testing that a request redirects

I have a route for a post request that redirects to another route.

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
  post "/name" do
    # do some other stuff here
    redirect '/country'
  end


</code></pre>

And you can write a test which checks that firstly a redirect happens when you make a post request to /name and secondly it checks if the new route has the correct URL:

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
  it "redirects a post request to /name to the route /country" do
    post '/name'
    expect(last_response).to be_redirect
    expect(last_response.location).to include 'country'
  end

</code></pre>

## Testing that data in the body of a post request is sent and saved

When the user fills in the form and submits the data, I fetch that data from the params and save it in a session cookie.

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
  post "/name" do
    session[:name] = params[:name]
    redirect '/country'
  end

</code></pre>

I can test that by making a post request in the test and including data in the body. Then I check if that data is present in the template that the request redirects to. If it is present, that means that saving the data from the request body worked.

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
  it "saves the name from params in the session and uses it in the country route" do
    post '/name', "name" => "Jon"
    get '/country'
    expect(last_response.body).to include 'Jon'
  end

</code></pre>

## Test that data from a session cookie is passed to a template

I can retrieve data from the session cookie and then use it in a template. By saving it in an instance variable, it is automatically passed to the template. That’s what the code below does.

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
  get "/country" do
    @name = session["name"]
    haml :country
  end

</code></pre>

The test for it looks like this:

<pre><code class="language-ruby">

  it "displays country page with a comment about name" do
    get '/country', {}, {'rack.session' => {'name' => 'Jon'}}
    expect(last_response).to be_ok
    expect(last_response.body).to include 'Jon'
  end

</code></pre>

The test is making a get request to the “/country” route while using a session cookie which stores the information about the name “Jon”. And then I can check that the body of the response includes “Jon”.

The test is similar to the previous example. I probably don't need both but I thought it would be good to include all the examples that I figured out.

So now I know how to test routes in a Sinatra app!
