---
title: The clone() method in Java
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 5
category: apprenticeship
---

The Java clone method belongs to the Object class and produces an identical copy of its object. It’s a bit of a controversial method with many developers thinking that it is not implemented in the correct way. A couple of articles that I found online even go so far as to say that it is broken.

<!--break-->

One of the issues is that the method produces a shallow clone of an object by default and not a deep clone. 

## Shallow copy

A shallow clone means that only the reference to an object is copied but not the actual object. So if we're copying object A which references object B, we will get a new object A2 which still references the same object B. Only one superficial level of the object is copied.

A shallow copy is not a problem for primitives because they are stored in the stack and don't contain any references to objects in the heap. When you shallow clone primitives, the values just get copied over.

## Deep copy

A deep clone means that objects are copied recursively including data from other mutable objects. Using the previous example again, let's imagine object A references object B. If we create a deep copy of object A, we get a new object A2 which references a copy of object B. That copy is a whole new object B2. 


## Ambiguous documentation

OK, next I had a look at the documentation for the `clone()` method. Here are some of the comments that are made in the Java source code.


<pre><code class="language-html">
     Creates and returns a copy of this object. The precise meaning
     of "copy" may depend on the class of the object. The general
     intent is that, for any object {x}, the expression:
     x.clone() != x
     will be true, and that the expression:
     x.clone().getClass() == x.getClass()
     will be {true}, but these are not absolute requirements.
     While it is typically the case that:
     x.clone().equals(x)
     will be {true}, this is not an absolute requirement.
     
</code></pre>

That sounds a bit wishy-washy for a computer programming language! So I guess it's not quite clear what it really does.

## Default implementation

For starters, you have to implement the clone method yourself. I did some experiments and created an Apprentice class which implements the Cloneable interface (Java inbuilt). Then I instantiated a new Apprentice to call `clone()` on it but the compiler says:

`Error:(11, 26) java: clone() has protected access in java.lang.Object`

So instead I overrode the inbuilt clone method with a public clone method that I created myself. 

<pre><code class="language-java">
public class Apprentice implements Cloneable {

    private SpiritAnimal spiritAnimal;
    private String name;

    public Apprentice(String name, String spiritAnimalType) {
        this.name = name;
        this.spiritAnimal = new SpiritAnimal(spiritAnimalType);
    }

    public SpiritAnimal getSpiritAnimal() {
        return spiritAnimal;
    }

    public String getName() {
        return name;
    }

    public void setName(String givenName) {
        name = givenName;
    }

    public Object clone() {
        try {
            return super.clone();
        } catch (CloneNotSupportedException e) {
            e.printStackTrace();
            return null;
        }
    }
}
</code></pre>

As you can see the `Apprentice` class also has a field variable for name and one for spirit animal. Its constructor creates a new spirit animal with a name.

The `SpiritAnimal` class looks like this:

<pre><code class="language-java">
public class SpiritAnimal {
    private String type;

    public SpiritAnimal(String type) {
        this.type = type;
    }

    public void setType(String givenType) {
        type = givenType;
    }

    public String getType() {
        return type;
    }
}
</code></pre>

I carried out another experiment where I instantiated a new apprentice (Maël) with her spirit animal (octopus). I then copied Maël and updated the name and spirit animal on the copied apprentice.

<pre><code class="language-java">
public class Main {

    public static void main(String[] args) {
        //creating a new apprentice
        Apprentice apprentice = new Apprentice("Mael", "Octopus");

        System.out.println("Original apprentice " + apprentice.getName() +
                " - " + apprentice.getSpiritAnimal().getType());

        //cloning the existing apprentice
        Apprentice clonedApprentice = (Apprentice) apprentice.clone();

        //updating the name and spirit animal of the cloned apprentice
        clonedApprentice.setName("Sarah");
        clonedApprentice.getSpiritAnimal().setType("Rainicorn");

        System.out.println("Cloned apprentice with updated name and animal " 
        		+ clonedApprentice.getName() +
                " - " + clonedApprentice.getSpiritAnimal().getType());

        System.out.println("Original apprentice printed again " + apprentice.getName() +
                " - " + apprentice.getSpiritAnimal().getType());
    }

}
</code></pre>

And guess what the print outs were?
The first one was as expected:

`Original apprentice Mael - Octopus`

The second one for the apprentice copy with updated name and spirit animal was also as expected:

`Cloned apprentice with updated name and animal Sarah - Rainicorn`

But the third one wasn't right!

`Original apprentice printed again Mael - Rainicorn`

A bug in the code!! Maël's spirit animal is octopus!

OK, so I guess that is why it is dangerous to use the `clone()` method out of the box. Seeing that it uses a shallow copy means that it only copies the `Apprentice` object but not the `SpiritAnimal` object. It simply copies the reference to the one `SpiritAnimal` that is stored in the heap and doesn't create a second one. So Mael and Sarah are currently sharing their spirit animal.

How do we get around this? 

## Using a copy constructor

I guess the fact that you have to override the protected clone method on the object already gives the developer a hint that they need to think twice about using this method. I fixed the bug by updating the public `clone()` method that I'd written to use a copy constructor. The `Apprentice` class looks like this now with an updated `clone()` method. 


<pre><code class="language-java">
public class Apprentice implements Cloneable {

    private SpiritAnimal spiritAnimal;
    private String name;

    public Apprentice(String name, String spiritAnimalType) {
        this.name = name;
        this.spiritAnimal = new SpiritAnimal(spiritAnimalType);
    }

    public SpiritAnimal getSpiritAnimal() {
        return spiritAnimal;
    }

    public String getName() {
        return name;
    }

    public void setName(String givenName) {
        name = givenName;
    }

    public Object clone() {
        return new Apprentice(name, spiritAnimal.getType());
    }
}
</code></pre>

The `SpiritAnimal` class stays the same. And if I run the application again now, I get the print outs as expected:

<pre><code class="language-java">
Original apprentice Mael - Octopus

Cloned apprentice with updated name and animal Sarah - Rainicorn

Original apprentice printed again Mael - Octopus

</code></pre>

Maël keeps her octopus!

Why is it working now? Because the copy method creates a whole new apprentice and passes in the type of the spirit animal. And by creating a new apprentice, a new spirit animal is created as well. So now we have two spirit animals, one for each apprentice.

Where it gets more interesting is if the `SpiritAnimal` class contained a reference to another class. Then we would need to implement the `Cloneable` interface for the `SpiritAnimal` as well and override its clone method. So it could turn into a bit of a lengthy chain, depending on the dependencies.

## Serialisation

My research concluded that there is another way to achieve a deep copy in Java. By using serialisation. And that means that you convert the object into a byte stream and then convert it back into a new object (that process is called deserialisation). That new object will be an exact copy of the original object. The advantage is that it writes out the whole object graph including all dependencies, so it will create a deep copy of all levels of objects. The objects need to implement the `Serializable` Java interface for this.

If I were to implement this for the `Apprentice` class clone method, the method would look like this:

<pre><code class="language-java">
public Object clone() {
        ObjectOutputStream objectOutputStream = null;
        ObjectInputStream objectInputStream = null;
        try {
            ByteArrayOutputStream byteArrayOutputStream = new ByteArrayOutputStream();
            objectOutputStream = new ObjectOutputStream(byteArrayOutputStream);

            objectOutputStream.writeObject(this);
            objectOutputStream.flush();
            ByteArrayInputStream byteArrayInputStream = new ByteArrayInputStream(byteArrayOutputStream.toByteArray());
            objectInputStream = new ObjectInputStream(byteArrayInputStream);
            Apprentice apprenticeCopy = (Apprentice) objectInputStream.readObject();
            return apprenticeCopy;

        } catch (IOException | ClassNotFoundException e) {
            e.printStackTrace();
        } finally {
            try {
                objectOutputStream.close();
            } catch (IOException e) {
                e.printStackTrace();
            }
            try {
                objectInputStream.close();
            } catch (IOException e) {
                e.printStackTrace();
            }
        }
        return null;
    }

</code></pre>

And remember that for this to work, both the `Apprentice` class and the `SpiritAnimal` class need to implement `Serializable`.

## The moral of the story

Only use the default `clone()` method for primitives but make sure to implement your own for objects. From what I gather this is a safe approach. 

Personally I wouldn't go so far as to say that the clone method is broken. But you just have to read the manual to know how to use it correctly!