---
title: Storing game states of several simultaneous games
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 1
category: apprenticeship
---

Unfortunately the idea I had yesterday about the Tic Tac Toe controllers inheriting from one controller didn’t quite work out the way I thought it would…

<!--break-->

Currently I’m creating a fresh Board in the GET response method of each controller. When I tried inheriting the GET response method, I ran into problems because I had to create a new board for each game but it only created a new board once. So I changed the code back to using three separate controllers, one for each game mode. But hopefully I’ll be able to implement the inheritance idea once I sort out the storing of the game state.

I need to think about how I manage the game state differently. The next story in my iteration requires me to implement a solution that makes it possible to play several games at the same time. So that makes me think, every time a user selects a game option in the menu, I need to create a new board. And then I need to pass that board somehow to the appropriate game controller.

And a game controller needs to have the capability to be aware of more than one game state. So I guess I need to save all the different boards in some sort of collection. But how do I know which board is which? Felipe suggested that I could add a game number or id to the URL, so that each game has a unique URL. I could save the different boards in a HashMap and the key could be the same as the id in the URL.

OK, as a first step I’ll try to create a unique URL for each game and to make the URL id available in the game controller. Then I’ll implement the code to create a new board when the game mode is chosen in the menu and pass the board to the controller to save it in a Map.


