---
title: Styling and Mini-Conf
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 1
category: apprenticeship
---

All that refactoring and those code improvements that I did over the last couple of days introduced a bug which lead to my Gui not working correctly anymore. Argh! I spent some time chasing it on Wednesday and then again yesterday while pairing with Enrique. It helped that he asked me a lot of questions about my applications and suggested a few approaches.

<!--break-->

In the end the problem was that the player was switched in the Game class but I neglected to tell the Gui about this fact. Hence the Gui was just looking at the same player the whole time. Anyway, it’s all resolved now and I’m working on styling the Gui.

It’s strange using the JavaFX CSS because it doesn’t support all the CSS features that I would expect. So I thought I could just add a margin on the buttons to spread them out a bit but the CSS margin property didn’t “just work”. Instead you have to give it padding, border insets and background insets to achieve the effect of a margin. So a 5px margin would be achieved with this code:

<pre><code class="language-java">
-fx-padding: 5px;
-fx-border-insets: 5px;
-fx-background-insets: 5px;

</code></pre>

Or a simple `cursor: pointer;` needs to be expressed as `-fx-cursor: hand;`. Oh well, luckily there’s Google.

This afternoon we have an internal conference called “Mini-Conf”. I think it’s the first one in London, so I’m very lucky to be able to attend. We were able to suggest topics that we would like the craftsmen to talk about during the conference. And then everybody could vote on topics and the most popular ones were chosen. I’m really looking forward to it!