---
title: Ruby Tic Tac Toe - Déjà vu?
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 3
category: apprenticeship
---

This week I started writing a noughts and crosses game application in Ruby. Just like I did in September last year! Except that in the meantime I’ve gained a lot of knowledge about good programming practises which I was unaware of before.

<!--break-->

Felipe encouraged me to think about how I would approach writing the application differently after spending almost four months at 8th Light now and having solved the same problem in Java.

## Testing

I think this is the biggest jump in learning for me. Last year I had not the faintest idea that you could have fake implementations of classes for testing. Or that you could stub out methods to make them less complex and only return the exact thing that you need for the test. I just tried to make my tests work by using lots of dependencies which made my tests very tangled up with production code. So if a class changed it meant that not only the tests for that particular class had to change but also other tests that were using that class.

I'm also a lot more disciplined with writing tests first. Several months ago the temptation of just writing the production code was really high - and I often did that and then retro-fitted the tests. But now I'm quite happy to write the tests first. Probably because I have a lot more practise and knowledge around testing, so it's not so difficult anymore.

## Immutability

This time I’ll definitely make the Board class immutable from the get-go. It helps so much for implementing the minimax algorithm! And of course immutability helps remove state from the application which is a cause of complexity. Throwing away a board object if it needs to change and instead returning a new one will (hopefully!) make it easier to reason about the code.

## Exposing internals

It took me some time to understand what Jim and Felipe meant when they said that I should not expose the internals of an object. I remember that was the feedback I received in my code review after I’d submitted my code for my job application here. I didn’t really get it. Same with the advice of not letting an object reach into another object to get information.

But I feel like I understand it now. You should not pass around details which only an object should know about itself. Objects B, C and D shouldn’t know about variables that belong to object A. And you should not get a piece of data that’s inside another object and do something to it. Instead the other object which the data belongs to, should manipulate the data itself and just hand the result over to you.

## Minimax

I didn’t manage to implement this algorithm when I wrote the application the first time around. But now that I have implemented it in my Java Tic Tac Toe, I am confident that I can also do it in Ruby.

## Make the code read like every day language

That was one of the first things that Felipe tried to teach me in my apprenticeship: make the code read like real sentences and use domain specific language instead of programming lingo. Write code using the actual words that people would use to describe a TTT game. 

And this doesn't only apply to production code but also to tests. Tests shouldn't be treated as second class citizens (says Uncle Bob!). 

Helper methods with good naming go a long way to making code easier to understand - both production code and tests.

All these things I didn’t know and am pretty sure I did wrong in my first attempt of writing the application.


## SOLID principles

Last summer I had genuinely never heard of these principles. I’d possibly heard that you should make sure that a method only does one thing but that’s about it. So this time I’ll be really aware of these principles and hopefully adhere to them successfully!

## Cells array

In my first attempt of TTT I used an array for the board cells which contained numbers (integers) if the cells were empty and strings (“X” and “O”) if the cells were in use. With my knowledge of Java Enums I don’t think I’ll do this again but instead find a way to centralise the knowledge about the players’ marks and empty cells. In a way that will make changing them easy. I’m not quite sure yet how - I think other apprentices have used modules or mixins but I need to research these things more. I don’t really know what mixins do (unless we’re talking about SCSS!).