---
title: An intense day
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2
category: apprenticeship
---

I’m really having a hard time concentrating this afternoon… both because I was in a workshop all morning which made me feel quite tired afterwards but also because Jarkyn’s review board is currently going on! She handed in her challenges today which marks the end of her apprenticeship. She also gave a really good talk about the importance of good conversations. Even though she must have been super nervous and under pressure, she was very calm and measured during the presentation.

<!--break-->

And now we’re waiting. I just feel an air of tension around the office today and I’m feeling really anxious to hear the result of the review board. Jarkyn was one of my instructors at GA, which means one of the first people to teach me how to code. She also encouraged me to apply to 8th Light when I thought I’d never be good enough to be accepted for an apprenticeship. I think if it wasn’t for her, I wouldn’t be here today. So she has a special place in my heart (and of course also because she’s just a really lovely person). And it makes me so proud to think how far she has come! The end of her apprenticeship!

But anyway, the waiting continues. While we’re waiting I’ll talk a bit about the workshop I attended this morning.

It was  a  workshop for a prospective client. The goal was for us to understand what their requirements were and for the client to consider their product in a new light and discover new aspects of it. It was based on the book that Enrique wrote about Inceptions. I read it last weekend, so was familiar with the different tasks he went through today.

The tasks included thinking about a quick elevator pitch for the product, designing the imaginary packaging for the product, creating personas for people who are or could be involved with the product. All these sparked a lot of interesting conversations between the members of the prospective client company and I think they realised a lot of new aspects of their potential offering.

In the end we tried to write user stories so that us from 8th Light would get more of a concrete idea of what needs to be built and would ultimately be able to give a cost estimate to the prospective client.

I was very impressed with how Enrique lead the workshop and how he managed to distill the sometimes wordy explanations by the prospective client into a concrete and precise sentence. I also liked that he was very honest and direct with the client and said things that they probably didn’t want to hear but that needed to be said.

I think a different company would have just gone in for the sale and glossed over the fact that the requirements weren’t quite clear. But our approach was really more to help the client to understand their own product better and shape the MVP. I really liked that!

So that little bit of magic that I was looking for during the client IPM the other day and never found... I felt that maybe it was there this morning!

## Update

At 6pm the fantastic news finally came: Jarkyn is a craftswoman now! I'm so excited for her and proud of her!