---
title: Different types of test doubles
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 4
category: apprenticeship
---

There are different types of doubles that can be used for testing instead of a real implementation. When I first learnt about test doubles, it blew my mind that you can just fake everything around a class under test. Just like that!

<!--break-->

But now I’m used to doing it and happily use doubles so that when I test a class, I really only test that one class and don't make my tests dependent on other classes.

Unfortunately, when I recently did this in my code for the mini review board, I didn’t pay attention to the naming of all the different test doubles that I was using. In fact, I called them all ‘mocks’. Colloquially, people often refer to test doubles as mocks, but in fact, a mock is one type of test double. 

Depending on what the double is doing, it should be named accordingly. That makes it easier for other developers to see how the test double works.

Here’s an overview of the test doubles:

## Dummy

A test dummy implements methods that are called by the method under test but that are not relevant for the test. In Ruby, I can write these methods and just leave them empty. In Java, for methods that need to return something, they should return null. In that case, if someone else mistakenly tries to use this method for something else, they get a null pointer error. 

Dummy methods really just satisfy the calling of a specific method in the code that is tested.

Here's an example from my Tic Tac Toe. The real `draw_board` method in the `Ui` class calls another method that creates the board and prints the result of that method to the screen. But when I'm testing the `Game` class, for example, which is dependent on the `Ui`, I can just pass in the Ui test double with the dummy implementation of that method which does absolutely nothing.


<pre><code class="language-ruby">
class Ui
  def draw_board(board)
    output.puts CLEAR_SCREEN + create_board_image(board)
  end
end

class DummyUi
  def draw_board(board)
  end
end

</code></pre>


## Stub

A stub is a simplified implementation of a method. Let’s say a method can return various different values. But for your test, you use an implementation of that method which always returns the same value.

I've used this in my Tic Tac Toe game for the `request_position` method. The real implementation of this method asks the user for input and then validates this input before it returns it. For the stub implementation the method always returns 3.

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
class Ui
  def request_position(board)
    output.puts "\nPlease enter a position:"
    get_position(board)
  end
end

class UiStub
  def request_position(board)
    3
  end
end

</code></pre>

## Spy

A spy is used when you want to check that a particular method was called. It could also return the number of times a method was called. I’ve used a spy for both of those purposes. But it can also be helpful in other ways. It could spy on the number of arguments that are passed into a method when it is called. Or it could return the values of the arguments.

The downside of using spies is that they are tightly coupled to the production code. The more you spy, the tighter you couple your tests to the implementation of the system. Hence it is best to use spies sparingly.

I've got an example of a spy near the end of this post.


## Mock

A mock is similar to a spy but it knows a bit more: it knows what is being tested. The assertion method is inside the mock rather than in the test and the mock is testing behaviour.

This can be useful when the collaborator is very complicated. Christoph gave me the example of temporal coupling. Let's say two methods need to be called in a particular order. This knowledge can be coded into the mock and the test itself doesn't need to know about it.

I haven't used a mock myself. I briefly spoke to Daniel about mocks and he said he doesn't really use them except in a mocking library or framework. So it looks like they're a bit more rarely used than the other types of test doubles.

## Fake

A fake method actually has behaviour. But it behaves differently from the real object. It sounds like it could be similar to a stub but it’s a lot more. A fake has actual logic in it.


## A fake and a spy in action

Let's see the theory in action. Below is an example from my contacts management system (after taking the feedback about naming on board).

The application stores contact data in a file. For that it needs to open the file and then write the contact data to it. Here's a simplified version of the class.

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
class Store
  FILE_NAME = "contacts_store.yml"

  def initialize(contacts_file = File)
    @contacts_file = contacts_file
  end

  def persist(contact_details)
  	# some other logic
    contacts_file.open(FILE_NAME, "w"){ |file| file.write(contact_details.to_yaml)}
  end
end

</code></pre>

When the `open` method is called on the `contacts_file`, it yields a file. And then the contacts data is written to that file.

I didn't want to test this method using a real file, so I used a fake implementation. This is what the test looks like.

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
  it "persists data as an array in yaml format" do
    file = FileSpy.new
    store = Store.new(FakeFileSystem.new(file))
    store.persist("test data")
    expect(file.data).to eq "---\n- test data\n"
  end

</code></pre>

The `Store` class takes a fake file system into which I'm passing a spy. And then I can ask the spy if the data that was received is correct.

This is what the `FakeFileSystem` and `FileSpy` look like.
Calling the `open` method on the `FakeFileSystem` yields the `FileSpy` that I passed in.


<pre><code class="language-ruby">
class FakeFileSystem
  def initialize(file)
    @file = file
  end

  def open(file_name, action)
    yield file
  end

  private

  attr_reader :file
end

class FileSpy
  attr_reader :data

  def initialize
    @data = nil
  end

  def write(data)
    @data = data
  end
end


</code></pre>


And that concludes the overview of the test doubles! 

When I looked through my old code I realised that I often combined different types of test doubles into one class. I guess sometimes it's necessary because when you can only pass in one class but need a spy method and a dummy method at the same time, then they have to be in the same class. If that's the case I'll use the umbrella term from now on and call the class `XYZDouble`.

But I also have some test doubles which have become quite long. It might be possible to separate some methods out and instead of an `XYZDouble` have an `XYZSpy` and an `XYZFake` for example. 

From now on I'll be more careful when naming and creating my test doubles!