---
title: Learning things as a full-time job
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 1.5
category: apprenticeship
---

Yesterday I spent almost the whole day writing. The first job was updating the [factories blog post](/blog/apprenticeship/post-58) with another example for the factory method pattern. It’s the third iteration that I’m dragging this story into now. Which means that in two IPMs already it wasn’t accepted by my mentors. Not good enough!

<!--break-->

So I did some blog post refactoring (thanks Georgina for using this term) and showed it to Cedric to get feedback. He didn’t find it very clear, so I started over again and tried to find yet another example. I think this is the fourth example that I’m using now. Cedric thought it was ok and Skim also more or less, so I kept it and published the blog post. I don’t know, somehow the factory method pattern is just really hard to explain!

Anyway, once that was done, I started the research for my next [blog post about the clone method](post-64) in Java and then wrote it. I started playing around with the clone method and cloning different things (primitives, objects…) to see what the actual issue with it is. Finally I figured out an example that shows the issue about the method creating a shallow copy of an object. Luckily Felipe’s feedback today was good. No further blog post refactoring required.

Next I’m preparing my Zagaku for Monday where I’ll be talking about CSS flex-box. Wes Bos recently published a number of tutorial videos about flex-box and I’ve wanted to watch those for ages, so my Zagaku was the perfect opportunity to go through them. I’ve used flex-box in my personal projects before but I wanted to see if there was more to it than I already knew. And what I already knew was from the amazing reference article on CSS-tricks.

Well, turns out there isn’t really that much more and Wes Bos is using the same article that I’ve been referencing. Chris Coyer is the golden source apparently! (If you don’t want to read the W3C specifications. Which no one wants. Except Maël maybe. Hehe…).

But there was a great video about setting up Gulp with auto-prefixer in 2 minutes. That was worth watching all the other ones for. I’ve only used Grunt and Brunch before and never Gulp, so it was cool to get a little insight.

While watching these tutorial videos I had another one of those moments where I thought: I have the best job. I can learn all this stuff that I’ve always wanted to learn. And which I would normally have to do at a weekend or in the evenings. But at the moment it is MY JOB to learn these things. And I’m getting paid for it! It’s incredible really.

Anyway, I feel like I’m just writing to fill up the page now. Better stop that and go back to preparing my Zagaku.