---
title: An insight into my relationship with the Minimax algorithm
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 1
category: apprenticeship
---

I’m very excited today! I already finished my iteration three days early and needed some more tasks to do. So Jim told me to start working on the unbeatable Tic Tac Toe computer player using the Minimax algorithm!

<!--break-->

Why does that excite me? Because I still have unfinished business with that algorithm. It has been at the back of my mind ever since I first applied to 8th Light and had to do my code test which included writing an unbeatable TTT player. Back then I wrote the application in Ruby and the player is indeed unbeatable. BUT I never managed to implement the Minimax algorithm. And, believe me, I tried and tried.

I spent almost two full weekends researching what it is and trying to implement it in my application but I just couldn’t get it to work! You know, full weekends. Those things when other people go out and get drunk. Or go to the movies. Or sleep all day. Or where my friends went to see Banksy’s Dismaland and I turned down a spare ticket for it because I had to implement Minimax. And then I couldn’t get it to work and had to hand in my code test without it. And I still got the job. So I might as well have gone to Dismaland!!

So, as you can tell, I still have a bone to pick with Minimax. I even considered taking another weekend and going back to my Ruby code to try again to implement it because it has been bugging me for months now.

Well, now I don’t need to spend any more weekends on it because I can tackle it in the office. And I have a lot of smart people around me who can help me win the battle if necessary.

Bring it on Minimax!