---
title: Women in tech and women fighting with minimax
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2
category: apprenticeship
---

We had a really interesting conversation at lunch yesterday about the lack of female software engineers and how to increase diversity in the industry. It was sparked by an event that Georgina, Jarkyn and I attended on Tuesday night at Pivotal Labs about bridging the gender gap in tech. I think Georgina and Daniel felt inspired to do a talk about this topic, which I hope they will hold for us one Friday. I’m looking forward to it!

<!--break-->

Jarkyn mentioned that it would be important that more women at our age who might be exposed to young girls soon (through having children, nieces, friends’ children etc.) should know more about coding so we can somewhat demystify this for girls and encourage more girls to take an interest in technology. And I think that is very true because a lot of women just brush it off as something that is so difficult that they could never do it anyway. That’s a real shame because it’s not at all! But I used to think exactly that up until about two years ago.

Fittingly I went to Codebar again last night which was really good fun. I often don’t really feel like going but then once I’m there and chat with all the lovely people and try to explain some stuff to coding newbies, I really enjoy it and feel really energised. A few of us went to the pub after the workshop and that was really fun, too.

Anyway, back to work. During the current iteration I started raising Github pull requests for the changes I make in my code. I think it works quite well because it’s a lot easier for my mentors to see what I changed. And that means that they can give me feedback more quickly once they have a moment during the day.

The only thing that I am a bit worried about is that it might impact my other tasks because once I get feedback, I try to implement it (if it doesn't involve too big refactorings). That means that I'm using up additional time during the day, which I should really be spending on my new tasks. I guess we’ll see how it goes over the next weeks.

This week’s iteration includes minimax (it’s back to haunt me!), so I started setting up the scoring method yesterday and wrote some tests to check the computer player’s move for different game states. I paired on it with Priya for a bit and I had a few conversations about it with other apprentices. I get the impressions that a lot of us find the implementation of this algorithm challenging, which makes me feel slightly better. I just read Georgina’s blog post which confirms it as well. She also linked to a useful resource with pseudo code for minimax. I’ll read it once I finish this blog post.

Which is now.

Bye!