---
title: Excluding my slower rspec tests
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 1.5
category: apprenticeship
---

Jim had already mentioned in my last IPM that I should exclude my slower tests from the suite of tests that I run all the time while I’m developing. Of course I still need to be able run them from time to time and as part of my continuous integration. (So deleting isn't an option here...)

<!--break-->

A slow test suite for development can be dangerous because it can be tempting to run the tests less and less to save time.

I’d been postponing this activity for the last few days because I remember when I did the same thing for my Java project, that I thought it was a bit of a pain. 

Today I added another couple of slow tests and the test suite now took a bit over 2 seconds. The waiting was starting to annoy me, so I thought I’d tackle the task.

Turns out - it wasn’t difficult at all! Rspec kindly allows to add tags to the slower tests and then you can use the below command to run the tests and exclude the slower tests.

`rspec --tag ~slow spec`

And when you run `rspec spec` it runs all tests as usual. So simple! No faffing around with Maven, no changing the travis.yml file. Having worked with Java, Ruby now surprises me all the time by how easy it is to use.

The only thing that was a little tricky was changing my keyboard shortcuts.

I remapped `<leader>t` to run `rspec spec` but I wanted to change it to the command that excludes the slow tests. But I couldn’t for the life of me figure out why it didn’t work!

When I ran this command from inside vim `:! rspec --tag ~slow spec` I always got the error message `no such user or named directory: slow`. Why does it think that slow is a directory?

Luckily Felipe was around and I asked him for help. He said that the problem was that the `~` is interpreted as the root directory. To get around this, I need to escape it.

Some more googling told me that I could put the troublesome command into single quotes like this:

`:! rspec --tag '~slow' spec`

And it worked. Phew!