---
title: Relax… it’s Ruby!
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 3
category: apprenticeship
---

During my IPM last night I demoed my multiplication generator application and my Tic Tac Toe application.

<!--break-->

One of the bits of feedback that I received was that I can make my code a lot terser by using more of the Ruby Enumerable methods (not just `.each`…). I started refactoring my code this morning and I’ve already saved so many lines of code by doing that!

Another change that I need to make is with regards to my tests. I liked using the inbuilt mocks in rspec. Shiny new things that I get given for free and can play with! But Felipe suggested that I should use the `StringIO` object a bit more instead and reduce my use of mocks.

Here’s an example of a test that I had written:

<pre><code class="language-ruby">

    it "asks user for a position" do
      input = StringIO.new
      output = StringIO.new
      ui = Ui.new(input, output)
      allow(ui.input).to receive(:gets).and_return("2")
      expect(output).to receive(:puts).with("\nPlease enter a position:")
      ui.request_position(Board.new)
    end

</code></pre>

And here’s how Felipe suggested I should write it without using the mock:

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
    it "asks user for position" do
      output = StringIO.new
      ui = Ui.new(StringIO.new("2"), output)
      ui.request_position(Board.new)
      expect(output.string).to eq("\nPlease enter a position:\n")
    end

</code></pre>

The advantage of the latter approach is that if the production code changes, I am less likely to have to change the tests. For example if we suddenly decide not to use `puts` anymore but instead the method `print` with an added `\n` character in the end, the test will still pass because the output string still receives the same thing as before. If we had used the mock where we say that it expects to receive `puts`, then the test would have broken. 

In addition to that, the first example is a bit strange because of the order of activities. I've heard of the order of "arrange, act, assert" but in the first example, the action comes last and the assertion comes before it.	

Overall, I get the impression that I can be a lot more relaxed with my Ruby code. For example, I created two test double classes which are completely separate from the real class that they’re a double for. I asked Felipe if I should make them related somehow. By inheritance maybe? In Java I either used an interface or I extended the real class in the test double. But apparently in Ruby this is not normally a done thing and it’s ok to just leave the classes as they are. Wow! Although I guess that does mean that I’ll try to use doubles sparingly because the danger of neglecting to update them when the real class changes is very high...

I also tried to find a way to make the player marks a bit more standardised and created the `PlayerMarks` class which contains an X and O symbol.  And then my intention was to refer to the marks in other classes as `PlayerMarks::X` and `PlayerMarks::O`. But Felipe said that it’s not necessary to do this. In fact, I have to admit that I haven’t even followed my own rule consistently and just used symbols in some of my classes where I forgot to include the `PlayerMarks` class. 

I guess I was trying to emulate something like an Enum in Java but in Ruby it’s not really possible. The beauty of implementing an Enum in Java is that you can be sure that no invalid constants are used. It’s kind of like a name space that the compiler enforces. If you specify that the player marks are "X" and "O" then it’s not possible to use a “Y” instead. Or if a method has a return type of a specific Enum then you can be sure that it returns one of the specified constants in the Enum. Nothing else. None of these things are possible in Ruby, so I might as well use symbols without creating an artificial “home” for them in a class.

Yes, so overall… Ruby is so much fun!

Caveat - before any concerned colleagues or mentors open Slack to message me - of course I don’t mean that I’m going to start writing sloppy code because I’m so relaxed… When I say that, I mean that the language is a lot less strict than the Java compiler and I therefore feel like I have more freedom, for example mixing types, not using interfaces etc. But I’ll still do my best to keep my code clean 😃
