---
title: Abstract classes
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2
category: apprenticeship
---

During my IPM yesterday, Jim introduced me to abstract classes. I’d seen them around but I’d never felt the need to use one really. Mainly because I wasn’t 100% sure what they are and what the difference to an interface was. I usually used interfaces.

<!--break-->

But the use case yesterday showed the difference quite clearly. I had some duplication in my code, which I thought was fine, because both methods were required to be implemented by the interface.  But Jim pointed out that they did exactly the same thing.

<pre><code class="language-java">
// This is the Player interface
public interface Player {
    Mark mark();
}

// ComputerPlayer implements the Player interface which includes the mark() method
public class ComputerPlayer implements Player {
    private Mark mark;

    public ComputerPlayer(Mark mark) {
        this.mark = mark;
    }

    public Mark mark() {
        return mark;
    }
}

// HumanPlayer also implements the interface Player and therefore also has to 
// have the mark() method
public class HumanPlayer implements Player {
    Mark mark;

    public HumanPlayer(Mark mark) {
        this.mark = mark;
    }

    public Mark mark() {
        return mark;
    }
}
</code></pre>

When Jim asked me how we could eliminate this duplication, I could only think that maybe both classes need to inherit from a superclass in addition to the interface? Something along those lines. Then the super class could have the `mark()` method and both human and computer players could inherit this.

Jim pointed me in the direction of abstract classes. In contrast to an interface, an abstract class can implement methods as well. 

So we changed the Player interface to an abstract class and made the ComputerPlayer and HumanPlayer both extend the abstract class. Then we were able to use IntelliJ's refactor functionality to pull the mark() method up to it's super class (the abstract Player class). Unfortunately the automatic refactoring didn't recognise that it needed to do it for both HumanPlayer and ComputerPlayer at the same time but at least it did it for one. And I then manually implemented the code for the other. 

This is the new code now.

<pre><code class="language-java">
// Player is now an abstract class which includes the implementation of the mark() method
public abstract class Player {
    protected Mark mark;

    public Player(Mark mark) {
        this.mark = mark;
    }

    public Mark mark() {
        return mark;
    }
    public abstract int getPosition(Board board);
}

// and all ComputerPlayer and HumanPlayer need to do now is call super in their constructor 
// to get the mark.
public class ComputerPlayer extends Player {

    public ComputerPlayer(Mark mark) {
        super(mark);
    }
}

public class HumanPlayer extends Player {

    public HumanPlayer(Mark mark) {
        super(mark);
    }
}
</code></pre>

Today I did some research on when exactly to use interfaces and when to use abstract classes. Because my initial thought after this refactoring was "Why do we even use interfaces? We could just use abstract classes all the time!".

So what are the differences other than the now obvious one that abstract classes can implement methods and interfaces can't? 

Interfaces contain a list of methods that all classes that implement the interface need to have. An interface shows that these classes share an API and defines the public contract. An abstract class should be used when classes also share the implementation of the methods and not only the names and parameters. 

Interfaces only contain public methods and abstract classes can implement protected abstract and public abstract methods.

When we use an abstract class, we define the characteristics of an object and specify what the object is. The interface establishes a contract about what the object can do. 

So, I think in future I will use an interface if two classes share the same method names and variables. But once I see duplication between the method implementation, I'll use an abstract class and implement the duplicated code there so the sub-classes can inherit it.
