---
title: Squashing a bug first
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 1
category: apprenticeship
---

It’s my first day back from holiday today. I'm back in the basement (can't wait for our new office!!) and went straight back to working on my Java web Tic Tac Toe.

<!--break-->

I have got the functionality in place now for being able to play multiple games simultaneously. I still need to tidy up my code as I feel that I’ve got some duplication in my various TTT controllers.

But first I had to deal with a little problem with my unbeatable computer player. Suddenly it was beatable! I couldn’t remember that I had changed anything in the algorithm of my old TTT code. I had changed the interfaces a bit and then just deleted all the classes I didn’t need anymore to create my TTT core jar. So I was a bit baffled by it.

On closer examination I realised that I had changed how the move is made. I implemented a method that calculated if it is X’s or O’s turn, so I didn’t need to pass the mark into the `Board.placeMark()` method anymore. That way it’s easier to use the code for my web TTT because I don’t need to get the information of the current mark separately but it is automatically calculated. However, that caused a bug in the minimax algorithm. To fix it I added the old method which had the mark as an argument back and use it in the minimax algorithm.

It took me a while to figure this out and I was briefly wondering if I should actually fix it. After all, the story I was working on was to play several games simultaneously. But then I thought, if this was a client project, I wouldn’t demo this broken project in the IPM either. Yes, this is just a project for me to learn but at the same time I need to prove that I’m not sloppy and make things work to the best of my ability. So, luckily I found the issue and fixed it. Phew!