---
title: A different approach to the second HTTP server 
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 1.5
category: apprenticeship
---

Yesterday I paired with Will in the morning. We worked on parsing the command line arguments that you can pass to the application when running the jar. I then spent the afternoon creating some infrastructure classes that create threads and made sure that everything was hooked up correctly to the test suite by printing out a received request and sending back a 200 response, just to see some tests passing.

<!--break-->

At first the tests wouldn’t go green and I thought I had done something wrong when it came to  writing to the socket but it turned out that I had set the wrong path in the Fitness test suite. Once I had rectified that it all worked fine.

Now I’m working on parsing an incoming request and storing it in a Request object. For server number 1 I stored all the information that a request has in the Request object, including things like range, method or if the request is authorised or not. But Felipe said that a request should really only have a request line, header and body so that it reflects a real life HTTP request. So that’s how I’m writing it now.

Clearly my approach to writing the code this time is a bit different from last time. Because I already know how to solve the problem. Don’t they say that you really only understand the problem once you’ve written the code for it? That’s exactly how I feel with the HTTP server.

The first time around I was nervous about getting everything done that I had committed to. I wanted to make the tests pass as quickly as possible and tackled one test after the next. That way my code slowly grew to incorporate various additional HTTP responses.

For example, to make some of the tests for the simple requests pass, I just needed to read the first line of the request. In fact, when it came to other tests which were related to the request body, I at first didn't understand where the body was coming from. But then I realised that I was only reading one line of the request and that there must be more to it.  

This time I’m writing the code to read the full request (not just the first line) and build a request object with a request line, headers and a body. Once that’s all working, I feel like I’ve reached a mile stone. None of the tests are passing still but I feel like I’ve got an important part of the application done. Previously I only considered green tests as having reached mile stones.

Looking back at my first attempt of my HTTP server, I think maybe I should have made sure that I understand each test in detail before starting to code. I looked at some tests, understood how to make them pass and then implemented the code. Then I looked at another test or two and realised that I’d have to add some code here and there and made those tests pass again. And the more tests I added, the more complicated it became to add new code. And I didn’t know how to resolve this.

Someone once told me that you should let yourself be guided by your tests when you do TDD and the application design will fall into place. Well, I guess I’ve proven the opposite! All my unit tests were passing, the cob spec tests were passing but I didn't know how to make the code easier to maintain.