---
title: Slow progress is progress...
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 1
category: apprenticeship
---
After a failed attempt at separating my tests into categories yesterday, I thought I’d try again this morning. Currently I have two relatively slow tests which I’ve ignored, so that they don’t they don't slow down my test suite when I run all my tests.

<!--break-->

Jim gave me the task to solve the issue of slow tests in a different way than using `@Ignore` and I knew that you can somehow have different test suites or categorise the tests. So my aim was to have my fast tests running by default and the slow tests only when required.

I did some research and found several blog posts that show how to use the Maven Surefire plugin to achieve this. You can categorise the tests and then set one category as default in Maven and the other category will only be run with a specific command.

But I still couldn’t get it to work this morning! I don’t know what I’m doing wrong.

So I parked that story for now and went onto creating a JavaFX GUI for my Tic Tac Toe. So far I have nine buttons on a GUI window. Each button represents a cell of the board (albeit they are currently not in the order of three by three lines but a bit all over the place). 

I hooked up an event handler to each button. I was able to test for the right amount of buttons and that a method runs when a button is clicked. The question that I’m facing now is how that method knows which of the nine button was clicked? Once I figure that out, my plan is to somehow pass that information to the game logic so it can see which position each player has chosen.