---
title: Performing another kata
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2
category: apprenticeship
---

Tomorrow I have to perform the Roman Numerals kata. A few weeks ago I performed the Bowling Game kata and I got a lot of useful feedback afterwards.

<!--break-->

I thought I’d summarise it all here in an effort not to make the same mistakes again tomorrow!

## Being nervous

The biggest issue was that I was very nervous last time. I’m normally not a nervous person. I don't mind speaking in front of people, for example. But I think last time I was nervous because I felt that I didn’t have the time to prepare well enough because I was so busy with my other stories. In addition, I had a time restriction for the performance that I knew I could never hit. I think I was supposed to complete the kata in less than 7 minutes but I knew it would be 12 or more.

This time, I made sure to practise a lot. I still seem to make  mistakes every time I practise but at least I become faster at understanding how to fix them. Also, I don't have a time restriction, so hopefully that means that I can relax more. People will just have to bear with me!

## Performance

Last time, I received feedback that my performance wasn’t as good as it could have been. My choice of background music wasn’t matching the theme of the kata. Fair enough! This time, I chose songs that are related to the roman theme.

Enrique gave the example of a kata performance which he particularly enjoyed which was when someone sang along to the background music while writing the code. My karaoke specialism is Alanis Morisette but I don’t think she has any roman numeral related songs, so I can’t take on this challenge.

Another piece of advice that I received was that I should introduce the kata before I start. Last time I just assumed that everybody who was watching my performance knew what I was doing and why I was doing it but we had a couple of visitors that day, who might have been a bit confused. So this time I’ll make sure to introduce the exercise.

## Typing

I felt like during the Bowling Game kata performance, I made a typo in every line. I was very nervous, so that didn’t help. But Enrique also suggested that I should just type more slowly which should help improve the accuracy. And ultimately I’ll complete the kata faster because I don’t have to correct my typos all the time.

## Tests should always be visible

Normally, when I write my Tic Tac Toes, I like my tests to take over my whole screen when I run them. So I did the same thing when I performed the Bowling Game kata. But that meant that the test results were only visible for a brief moment before I went back to typing frantically. For the audience it is easier to follow along when they see the test results the whole time, so this time I have it set up that way.

Felipe recommended that I use rerun. Rerun is a Ruby gem which restarts an app when the files change, so every time I save, the tests run. I don’t even need to run them manually! Very handy.

## Making changes to my vim setup shortly before the kata

Yes… I did that last time. Not a good idea! I thought it would make me faster and I was desperate to try anything to shave off some seconds of the duration of the kata. But in the end it just confused me. I’m not doing that again.

## Practising on the same keyboard

This time I made sure to use my laptop keyboard all week and I'll use it tomorrow for my performance as well. Last time I made the mistake to practise on one of the external Apple keyboards that we have in the office and then I performed the kata on my laptop. The keyboard layout is the same (🇺🇸), so I didn't think it would make a huge difference. But the keys on the external keyboard press down a lot easier and I think it did confuse me a little bit. This time, I want to make sure to eliminate as many uncertainties as I can!