---
title: The JavaFX Gui saga continues
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 1
category: apprenticeship
---

Today I’m back at it! I’m taming the beast that is JavaFX and am trying to fit it into my application.

<!--break-->

I’d worked on it with Felipe on Tuesday night and we had left it with a board displaying and a class registering all the clicks that a user was making. So far, so good. We discussed that the next step would be to have the GuiGame class check if a new click has been made and if so, place a mark in that position on the Board class.

This morning I wrote a test for it with a wonderful test double that provides fictitious clicks and then I check if the game is over after all clicks were used up. I wrote the production code for it and the test has a beautiful green colour.

Hm. But I wasn't sure if this would actually work. Jim had mentioned to me that I can’t have a loop running while at the same time starting the JavaFX thread. And this is exactly what this code was doing - running a loop to check if a new click has been made.

So I wired up the new class and method to Main and started the application. Yay! I created an infinite loop. And the gui window doesn’t even pop up.

Next I switched around the order in which the GuiGame and the JavaFX window are starting. If I start the JavaFX window first and then the game, the application doesn’t even enter the loop to check if a new click was made.

Cool 🍌🍌.

After lunch I’ll try to update the GuiGame with a clicked position without using a loop.