---
title: Elixir and flexbox
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 1
category: apprenticeship
---

Today I started with my Tic Tac Toe in Elixir. I’m really excited to be learning Elixir. The excitement is mainly influenced by the fact that a lot of my colleagues are really into it and think that Elixir and its web framework Phoenix are the next big thing.

<!--break-->

Of course I want to learn the next big thing!

But it’s hard… I feel like I've forgotten how hard it is to learn a new language. I had such an easy ride with Ruby, because I already knew quite a lot about the language. But now in Elixir… It took me forever to figure out how to even run my application!

But I finally did and got going. But I feel like I need to google everything… Even small things like how to turn a string into an integer or how to strip user input of the return characters. “gets.chomp” anyone? No, didn't think so.

So, progress it’s slow but it’s still fun to work with something new.

On another note, I got a lot of really good feedback from Christoph on my blog post on test doubles. I’ll implement that now before I go home.

Today I was randomly contacted by a colleague in Chicago, asking me for help with flexbox. Seems like my Zagaku and blog post on it have made me into a bit of an authority on the topic. Unfortunately I’m not! I just read the article on [CSS tricks](https://css-tricks.com/snippets/css/a-guide-to-flexbox/) and watched a few tutorials… So I couldn’t really help him but it was still fun to chat with someone from the Chicago office.