---
title: Excuse me, where are the loops, please?
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 3
category: apprenticeship
---

Spoiler alert: as far as I can tell, in Elixir there are none. At least not how I know them from my old friends Ruby, Java or JavaScript.

<!--break-->

Anyway, the trouble I have at the moment is that every time I get to a problem that I would normally solve with a loop, I stumble. I know that I have to use recursion instead but it takes me a while to figure it out. It’s just such a different way of thinking.

Here’s an example. Earlier I needed to write a function that checks if the Tic Tac Toe board has a winning combination.

The board is 3x3 in size and I'm counting each cell as a number starting with 0. 

I have a list of winning combinations like this:

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
  @winning_combinations [{0,1,2}, {3,4,5}, {6,7,8}, {0,3,6}, {1,4,7}, {2,5,8}, {0,4,8}, {2,4,6}]

</code></pre>

In Ruby this would have been a two-dimensional array but in Elixir I'm using a list of tuples. 

And in Ruby I would have iterated over the winning combinations and checked for each of these indeces if the current game state has all X marks or all O marks for any of those combinations. If that was the case, then the game would have a winner.

It would have looked something like this.

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
  def winning_mark(board, winning_combinations)
    winning_combinations.each do |combo|
    if winning_line(board, combo)
      board[combo.first]
    end
  end

  def winning_line(board, line)
    #check if all marks on the board for that line are the same
  end

</code></pre>

But in Elixir there is no iteration like in Ruby because Elixir can't keep state. In Ruby, when we iterate, it presents each element from the list one by one and it remembers where it was at in the iteration. But that's not possible in Elixir.

The solution here is recursion. The "remembering where we're at" part of the exercise is done by passing in the (altered) list again. Here's how I solved it:

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
  def winning_mark(board), do: winning_mark(board, @winning_combinations)

  defp winning_mark(board, [line | rest]) do
    if winning_line(board, line) do
      Enum.at(board, elem(line, 0))
    else
      winning_mark(board, rest)
    end
  end

</code></pre>

The first line belongs to the public interface. That function will be called by other parts of the application to get the winning mark. But all the first function does is call the recursive function and give it a second argument, the winning combinations.

The private function (starting with `defp`) now takes the winning combinations and splits them into the head (the first element) and the tail (the rest). So we can use the first element and do some stuff with it, just like we can do with the each loop in Ruby. But while the each loop automatically hands us the next element, we have to achieve this manually here by calling the same function again, just passing in the rest of the winning combinations. 

Then the first element of the rest gets separated again, we do some stuff with it and then call the function again with the rest-rest.

In theory I understand it but somehow it always takes me a bit of time to figure it out when I need to do this in practise.