---
title: So many things to do!
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2
category: apprenticeship
---

I’m having a bit of a fragmented day today… First thing this morning I had my IPM with Felipe where I demoed my four by four board and random computer player.

<!--break-->

We didn’t go into too much detail about my code because we needed the time to talk about a new project. I have to write a contacts management application and my code will be reviewed by a mini review board (sounds so official!) next Friday. 

The application needs to create, list and update contacts. And I have to make the contacts persistent. I’ll have to write them to a file which I’ve never done before, so it’ll be interesting to learn that. Hopefully it won’t be too difficult but this being Ruby, I have faith that it’s doable.

I started working on the application a little bit and I feel like I really have to think a lot more about the approach now! With my Tic Tac Toes it was easy - I always started with the Board class, added a player, a user interface and took it from there. But now… no board! No players!

I decided to start with the Ui as that’s how I think about my application at the moment - from a user perspective. A user is shown the options and then decides what they want to do.

I think I also feel a bit more unsure about how to design the programme because I know a lot more about how to design software. Previously, I just wrote the code, it worked, done. But now I feel like I want to do it the right way, not just any way.

For example I created a class that creates contacts, called “ContactCreator”. But then I remembered that I read in one of the books that you shouldn’t have class names that end with “er”, like “Manager” or “Organiser”. If I remember correctly, the reason was that the class name indicates that the class is doing too much.

Hm, well I don’t think that a Creator does to much if it just creates contacts. So I guess I’ll leave it for now.

At lunch time I went to GA to talk to their current web development students about how to find a developer job and what my first job out of GA was like. It’s always nice to go back to GA and catch up with people I know. There are fewer and fewer of those these days but one of my instructors, Alex, was there and I gave him an update on how my apprenticeship is going.

When I came back, I paired with Ced for a bit on cloning and running the 8th Light blog on my machine. I have to raise a PR on it to add my blog post. I already spent quite a lot of time yesterday on trying to get it to run and it just doesn’t work! I tried to troubleshoot it again with Ced today but we didn’t get anywhere either. I mean, it’s just a Jekyll blog, how hard can it be? Git clone, bundle install, Jekyll serve. But it seems like the application can’t find my installed Gems or something. Ugh… Why are things never easy?

This afternoon I want to continue working on the contacts management system but I also have to prepare my Zagaku for tomorrow. Better do that first.

Well, at least I got my blog post out of the way now!