---
title: NodeConf London 2016
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 4
category: apprenticeship
---

This week I was lucky enough to get a ticket for NodeConf at the Barbican.

It’s a single track, all day conference about all things related to JavaScript and Node. I really enjoyed it and it was very well organised! The venue was great (I love the Barbican), the catering was great and most of the speakers were pretty good, too.

<!--break-->

As, I don’t know that much about Node, I learnt a lot of new things at the conference. Here’s a summery of some of the best talks.

## Robots, code and people

The conference started with a talk by NodeBot enthusiast @nodebotanist (Kas Perch). It seemed like she didn’t only like to build robots but also to wear them! She had a special belt with lots of colourful lights which you could tweet a CSS colour at and it would change to that colour. I tried it but didn’t notice the belt go `deeppink` but maybe that was because she stood mainly behind the lectern.

In her talk she made a case for the importance of open source projects: they’re fun, make developers happy and are a good way to bring new people into the industry. She didn’t go into too much detail about NodeBots but highlighted that the barrier to entry to robotics is relatively low in the sense that you didn’t need much to start with, it’s cheap and you can create something awesome with very little.

But the main part of her talk was focused on people. She emphasised how important it is to make our industry and especially open source projects inclusive. She felt that at the moment we’re missing out on lots of code because people feel excluded.

She compared the internet to the library of Alexandria. Every book that arrived in the harbour of Alexandria would be confiscated, copied and added to the library and finally returned to the original owner. The library accumulated hundreds of thousands of papyrus scrolls. But the library burnt down - and Kas is worried that we will experience a similar loss of knowledge on the internet if we keep excluding people.

She ended her talk with a call to make the industry more inclusive. As a first step she asked us to call out any sexist or racist comments, especially if we don’t fall into the group that is being offended.

## Server-less architecture in the wild

For me this was definitely one of the best talks. The speaker was Nikhila Ravi who I knew from NodeGirls. She’s really lovely and an awesome presenter. She works for Dwyl, a relatively new company which is focused on building MVPs. Dwyl is kind of an extension of Founders and Coders as their graduates get to work and gain experience there. And Nikhila is a FAC graduate too.

I had never heard of a server-less architecture before, so I learnt a lot from this talk. The first thing she emphasised during her talk was that server-less doesn’t mean that there are no servers. There are still servers but the development team doesn’t need to think about them. To make use of this concept it is best to have an architecture with small micro services, whereby each of them is deployed to a service. At Dwyl they use AWS Lambda.

The advantages are not only that the dev team doesn’t need to worry about deployment infrastructure or downtime but the payment model is designed so that you only pay per execution but you don’t pay for idle time.

After she showed us a couple of examples of how she architected a project, she then did a live deploy - the only live demo of the day! She deployed a jukebox website which had a combination of a service that queried the LastFM API to return songs, a service that saved the song information to a json file, one that retrieves songs from S3, one for the graphql database. These were all in separate AWS Lambdas. Luckily it all went extremely smoothly and Nikhila was understandably relieved when the website was live.

She highlighted that integration testing is very important when having lots of separate little services. And that debugging can be very hard. Her recommendation to make life easier was to have one repo for each lambda, document the interfaces clearly, use deployment scripts instead of manual deployment and create architecture diagrams and keep them up to date.

## Making ES6 happen with ChakraCore and Node

I’d been looking forward to this talk because I’ve been following the speaker, Christian Heilman, on Twitter for a while. And the talk was fantastic! Informative, hilarious and it kept the audience engaged.

I think he was one of the few speakers who showed something like a little table of contents for this talk when he started. And he had designed his slides so that you could always tell which section of the talk he was at and how many more sections there were. It seems like a small thing but it made such a difference to listen to a talk that was so well structured. And to know how much longer it would go on for. I’ll have to do something like that for my talks from now on.

Again, I learnt a lot in this talk. I had no idea what ChakraCore was! Chakra is the JavaScript engine that is used in InternetExplorer and Microsoft Edge. Microsoft open-sourced the core part of Chakra as ChakraCore at the end of 2015.

Christian works for Microsoft. He started off his talk by listing all the things that were great about JavaScript. For example that it makes the web more interactive, that it’s free and there’s no tooling overhead, there’s no compiler, it works directly in the browser and that it’s a very forgiving language that allows for a number of different and adventurous styles of writing it. When he highlighted all these advantages, I already felt a little iffy… Surely these are not all good things? And indeed, the next slide was about the negative sides of JavaScript and it showed exactly the same list again.

Christian said that the difficulty with JavaScript was always browsers. Understanding their differences and quirks and supporting old browsers made writing JavaScript less fun. Quote by Christian: “Old browsers shouldn’t be supported anymore. They should be retired. They should be in the park playing football!” He presented these kind of jokes during the whole talk with an absolute straight face. It was so funny!

With Node, Christian feels that we liberated ourselves from these restrictions and can finally run JavaScript in an environment that we control. Except that we then went and created too many needless dependencies that we don’t understand and that make the environment brittle. So again we are making our lives more difficult.

We should use ES6 as a new cut off point and clean up our act. ES6 has a lot of inbuilt features which make library usage unnecessary, we should be revamping our education materials and freeing ourselves from all these dependencies.

He promised that ChakraCore is a brand new JavaScript engine that breaks the monoculture that we had (there was only V8 before) and without any of the bad stuff from the old IE engine. It is compatible with V8 through a layer on top of ChakraCore which is called ChakraShim.

I really need to learn ES6.

## State of Node.js core

This presentation was basically a rundown of how Node developed over time and what is happening to it now. I remember that some time ago Node.js was suddenly called io.js but I never knew what exactly the background was. Well, now I know!

So apparently Node was first created by a company called Joyent but the development was very slow and the next stable release of Node 0.12 was always imminent but just wasn’t happening. So someone else created a fork of the code and wanted to finally make the release but they weren’t allowed to use the name Node. So they released it as io.js in January 2015. Joyent finally released Node 0.12 in February 2015 and in May 2015 Joynet node and io.js merged their code again under a new organisation called the Node foundation. The first release of the merged branch was in September 2015.

## Kill all humans

This was also a great talk. The speaker was Jan Lehnardt, another German developer who I’d been following on Twitter for ages and happened to have lunch with on the day.

He started his talk by explaining what semantic versioning is. And that in theory this would work very well if it wasn’t for humans. Humans are usually the point of failure when semantic versioning isn’t done correctly. For example sometimes the major version number will be increased for marketing purposes, even though the change isn’t that big. Or a release has breaking changes but someone forgets to increase the major version number and everybody wonders why their code doesn’t work anymore. On this occasion he also introduced the German word “Hauptversionsnummernerhöhungsangst”, which is the fear of increasing the major version number.

To resolve these issues, Jan decided to take the human out of the equation and write a Node module which does the version number changes automatically. It’s called “semantic-release” and you need to use certain keywords in your git commit messages (like “fix", “feature" and "breaking change”) and based on that the version number will be updated. Personally I think it doesn’t really resolve the issues because you still have to depend on a human to use the correct commit messages but I guess it’s a start.

He also introduced another tool which he created, called Greenkeeper. It checks if any npm packages that your code depends on have been updated and if there are breaking changes. I think it might even update the packages itself if there are no breaking changes.

I don’t think I’ll use either of these tools in the near future but I thought the ideas were great and the presentation was very well done!

## Node.js that’s hugely reliable, fast, and scalable

The last presentation was given by two gentlemen from the BBC. Apparently a lot of their high traffic websites run on Node! For example the BBC homepage. And for the page announcing that Leicester won the football, they also used Node and had 1.4 million web socket connection open at the same time.

The two gentlemen are convinced that Node is reliable and hugely scalable and gave several examples of BBC websites that run on Node.

Overall it was a really good conference! There were a few talks which I didn’t really understand but I think I still got a lot out of it. I’m glad I took the day off and went!