---
title: Implementing the 4x4 board option
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 5
category: apprenticeship
---

Over the last two days I implemented the option to play the tic tac toe game on a 4x4 sized board.

Before I started on the task I wasn’t quite sure how difficult it would be. Spoiler alert: I didn’t need to tear my hair out or bang my head against the keyboard, so it wasn’t too bad!

<!--break-->

Part of the requirements were that I write a blog post about what I had to change in my codebase. I guess, one of the things that I’m trying to learn during the apprenticeship is how to write easily maintainable and extendable code. So adding a new board size option is a great way of testing how good my code currently is!

##Change the Board class

I started by changing the `Board class`. Previously a new Board was always initialised with an array of 9 cells. That clearly doesn’t work for a 4x4 Board where you need 16 cells. 

For my new and improved Board class you now have to pass in the dimension (3 or 4) to create a new board. And depending on the dimension it will create the correct amount of empty cells.

<pre><code class="language-java">
    public Board(int dimension) {
        this.dimension = dimension;
        this.numberOfCells = dimension * dimension;
        this.cells = createCells();
    }
    
    private Mark[] createCells() {
        Mark[] cells = new Mark[numberOfCells];
        for (int i = 0; i < numberOfCells; i++) {
            cells[i] = EMPTY;
        }
        return cells;
    }
    
</code></pre>

I also updated my second constructor so it takes varargs, which means the number of arguments is flexible. So when I create a test for a specific game state or copy the board with the current game state, I can create a new board and pass in the existing cells.

<pre><code class="language-java">
    public Board(Mark... gameState) {
        this.dimension = (int) Math.sqrt(gameState.length);
        this.numberOfCells = gameState.length;
        this.cells = gameState;
    }
    
</code></pre>

## Fix the tests

Cool, so that meant that a lot of my tests broke. I updated them by passing in a 3 every time that I create a new Board. In hindsight I'm wondering if maybe I could have somehow set the board size of 3x3 as a default if no parameter is passed when a board is created. Maybe by creating a third constructor? But then again it could be a bit confusing to have a default size. I guess it has its advantages to be more explicit. At least I know exactly which size board I'm creating.

OK, so passing in a 3 already fixed a lot of the failing tests. But now I needed to add some tests for a 4x4 board. I updated the name for the existing tests to refer to a 3x3 board and then I added the same test but for a 4x4 size board.

That made me realise that my application wasn't able to detect a winner on a 4x4 Board. Previously I had just checked if all three cells in a line are the same. The `Line` class was initialised with three field variables called `first`, `second` and `third`. Here's the code for checking if there is a winner:

<pre><code class="language-java">
public boolean hasWinner() {
    return allSame() && first != EMPTY;
}

private boolean allSame() {
    return first == second && second == third;
}

</code></pre>

I thought about how to update it and wondered if I should have an optional fourth field variable? Again maybe use varargs in the constructor? But what if at some stage my application needs to have a 5x5 board? Then I'd have to add another field variable.

I decided to get rid of the three field variables and instead use an array `Mark[]`. And then iterate through the array to detect the winner. I had to split it into two methods, one to check if all marks are X and another one to check if all marks are O.

The new code looks like that:

<pre><code class="language-java">
	public boolean hasWinner() {
        return (allX() || allO()) && line[0]!= EMPTY;
    }

    private boolean allO() {
        boolean allSame = true;
        for (Mark cell : line) {
            allSame = allSame && (cell == Mark.O);
        }
        return allSame;
    }

    private boolean allX() {
        boolean allSame = true;
        for (Mark cell : line) {
            allSame = allSame && (cell == Mark.X);
        }
        return allSame;
    }
    
</code></pre>

But the tests for detecting that there was a winner still didn't pass. So I had to make some more updates to those methods in the `Board` class' that figure out which one is a row, a column and a diagonal. 

Here's how the code looked before:

<pre><code class="language-java">
	private Line getRow(int currentIndex) {
        int index = currentIndex * getSize();
        return new Line(cells[index], cells[index+1], cells[index+2]);
    }

</code></pre>

And for now I decided just to add an if statement and return the correct amount of cells depending on the size of the board. Probably not the most sophisticated way of doing it but it made my tests pass and that's what we want, right?

<pre><code class="language-java">
	private Line getRow(int currentIndex) {
        int index = currentIndex * getSize();
        if (size == 3) {
            return new Line(cells[index], cells[index+1], cells[index+2]);
        } else {
            return new Line(cells[index], cells[index+1], cells[index+2], cells[index+3]);
        }
    }
    
</code></pre>

I did something similar for the methods that get the columns and the diagonal lines. 


Later, after I'd made all the changes and got all my tests passing, I went back to these methods and under usage of a lot of brain power managed to find a more elegant way of creating those lines. I knew that I could iterate and add each cell to an array. I tried to find the similarities between how much was added or subtracted from the index in relation to the size. Here's the `getRow()` method again, this time looking a bit more elegant.

<pre><code class="language-java">
    private Line getRow(int currentIndex) {
        int index = currentIndex * dimension;
        Mark[] row = new Mark[dimension];
        for (int i = 0; i < dimension; i++) {
            row[i] = cells[index + i];
        }
        return new Line(row);
    }
    
</code></pre>

Although I did wonder if the previous version of the method was better as it was easier to understand. I mean, you could see on first glance what was going on, while with the second version of the method, you have to crank up the brain activity a bit more. That said, if my clients suddenly decided that they needed other board sizes, the more complicated method would still work. But if I left the if statements then I'd have to add another condition and another and another... So I guess the latter version is better.

## Updating the board painter

OK, so what else did I need to update? The `BoardPainter` class which draws an image of the board to the console for the user to see. I had to make the horizontal lines between each row a bit longer for the 4x4 board and I also formatted the numbers to take up the space of two digits so that all columns have an even width. (Thanks for that tip, Christoph!)

## Just that one small issue of speed...

And as far as I remember, that was pretty much it! The tests passed and I could play the game in the console. Well, to be honest, I could really only play one game mode which was Human versus Human. If I tried any other game modes that involved the unbeatable computer player - I had to wait for aaaaages for it to make a move! Almost 8 minutes! That is terrible UX. Unless you really wanted to build up the suspense for the user. And then allow for some time to get a coffee. From Profurock. Well, I didn't want that. And I also had the requirement to ensure that the first computer move on an empty board would take less than three seconds.

In [yesterday's blog post](post-46) I pondered about different ways of approaching the problem, including hard coding the first move... Felipe didn't like that idea (who would have thought?) and also, I still had the problem that the second computer move was too slow. 

Felipe gave me a hint by saying that what makes it slow was that the computer had to calculate sooo many moves... Sooo many game states to create and evaluate! Hm... It took me a while to understand what he was driving at. I did some more googling and found out that you can speed it up by dividing the work up between two or more processors. Yeah, not really feasible for my use case. And there is a way to weight different squares of the game board and give more importance to some so that the algorithm evaluates those first. Or you can help the computer by using statistics but I think that was more for games that involve an element of coincidence like backgammon when you throw dice.

So none of those really helped me and then it dawned on me: you can just decrease the depth! I was passing the number of empty cells into the minimax method and with every method call it decreases that number. So if I don't start with the number of empty cells but just start with 8, that means it will work as normal for the 3x3 minimax but it will be a lot quicker for the 4x4 minimax because it only looks at about half the options. And it worked! All the tests are still passing and when I play, I can never win. Phew!