---
title: The rocky road to a Java web Tic Tac Toe
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2
category: apprenticeship
---


After spending lots of hours last week to try to understand how to use the Mustache and/or Handlebars templating engine in Java, I finally gave up this morning and decided to just construct my own HTML.

<!--break-->

I just couldn’t figure out how to pass variables to a Handlebars template. And I also struggled to compile the template into a String of HTML. And if I used Mustache I couldn't figure out how to reference the template's path. So I thought rather than wasting more time today, I’ll just implement my own Java methods. It was much quicker to do and it works!

I created a `TicTacToeController` for the route `/ttt-game`. This controller sends back HTML in the response body. And that HTML is displayed in the browser.

I used the same stylesheet as I’d done in my previous projects and after a bit of jiggery pokery with the HTML structure and CSS classes, I was able to display the board as I’d previously done in my Ruby and Elixir web TTT games.

Finally I was getting somewhere! I was about to raise the PR and thought I’d quickly update the Readme as well, to explain how to run the server with the TTT jar. That’s when I realised that when I started the server jar with maven, it all worked fine, but when I tried to visit the `/ttt-board` route in the browser, I got an error saying that it can’t find the `Board` class - so it doesn’t seem to find my TTT jar. I didn't have any of these problems when I started the application through IntelliJ.

I googled around and realised that the way I had added the jar dependency for my TTT wasn't the best. I tried to reference the path of the TTT jar using a system scope in my pom dependency. After many different attempts, I was finally successful with the following method:

1) create a new folder on the same level as the src folder, called `repo`

2) then use a long maven command to deploy the jar that exists somewhere on my laptop into this repo folder


<pre><code class="language-java">
mvn deploy:deploy-file -Durl=file:///path/to/that/repo/folder -Dfile=/path/to/my/jar/target/tic-tac-toe-1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar -DgroupId=de.rabea -DartifactId=tic-tac-toe -Dpackaging=jar -Dversion=1.0-SNAPSHOT

</code></pre>

3) tell maven that you have another project in the repo directory by adding this to the pom.xml

<pre><code class="language-java">
&lt;repositories>
    &lt;repository>
        &lt;id>project.local&lt;/id>
        &lt;name>project&lt;/name>
        &lt;url>file:${project.basedir}/repo&lt;/url>
    &lt;/repository>
&lt;/repositories>

</code></pre>

4) and I also had to add the maven shade plugin which packages up all the dependencies in one big jar.

And it finally worked!

The next hurdle was dealing with the stylesheet. The browser makes a GET request to `/styles.css` and I needed to return a response. I decided to read the CSS file and return the content in the response body. Again, this worked fine when running the project with IntelliJ but when I ran it from the command line, I was getting an error.

Turns out, I needed to use `ClassLoader` to get the file as an InputStream. (Thanks Danny!)
I had tried it with getting the absolute path of the file and then reading it.

Luckily that now works too and that Artisan story is complete.

But I still have one story outstanding: fixing the issue with the concurrency test. I worked on it a little bit today and changed the threading implementation from using the ExecutorService to just creating a new thread for every request. But that still didn’t fix the issue. I’m really out of ideas now for this one!