---
title: Testing the echo server
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 1
category: apprenticeship
---

I’m in dependency testing hell with my echo server!

<!--break-->

When I first got this story, I gave it quite a high estimate because I didn’t really know how to do it and what to expect. Then I did a spike which I got to work quite quickly, thought that it wouldn’t be too bad and lowered my estimates so that I could add another story to my iteration.

Bad mistake! Testing this code is so complex. I’m trying to wrap as many of the dependencies into my own classes, so I can either inject a fake or the real thing and use the fake for my tests and the real thing for production. But that has started to make my code really complex because my own classes now also have to return other wrapped classes.

And the problem I’m currently stuck at is that the PrintWriter needs to receive the OutputStream to be instantiated. I thought I could just create my own PrintWriter class and inject either a fake or the real print writer. But because the real PrintWriter depends on the OutputStream it’s not possible how I imagined it.

It’s definitely taking me a lot longer than I thought… I guess my plans of not coding at the weekend have just been shattered.

On a more positive note: Priya and Dannie performed a kata today. Mentor and mentee together. I thought that was really cool! And I don't think I'd ever seen a crafter perform a kata here at 8th Light so that was a nice change too. 