---
title: Prime Factors kata in Ruby
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2.5
category: apprenticeship
---

This morning I tried to speed up my performance of the Prime Factors kata in Ruby. Yesterday I managed to do it in 7 minutes 19 seconds but the goal was to do it in under 6 minutes.

<!--break-->

Jim had already given me a few tips on how to make it faster yesterday evening. For example using the shortcut `ctrl + n` to autocomplete words. I don’t know how I didn’t know about this! And he also said to potentially look into using a macro in vim to record a test block and then play it back and just fill in the gaps.

I tested out macros and wow… they’re cool! Although I didn’t know how I could create something that would let me jump from gap to gap so I could fill in the latest data for each test.

Ced suggested that I should use snippets but I haven’t really had the time to look into all the different plugins for them and understand which ones I should use. I’m a bit reluctant to just clone a ton of snippets into my vim setup that I will potentially never use. I’d rather customise my own. So I might investigate that further at the weekend.

Somehow the autocomplete tip didn’t really make me faster either. Maybe because the shortcut isn’t in my muscle memory yet and when I use it I have to pause for a bit to think, so it’s probably equally fast to just type out the word. But I’ll keep practising it.

Same as with `ctrl + [` to escape. I make so many typos when I try to use it! ESC was a lot easier. But Skim suggested that it would be faster not to leave the home row, so I’m going to stick with it. Hopefully soon my fingers will be a bit more unerring.

Felipe also gave me some more shortcuts to try out. Some of them I knew and some of them I didn’t (or maybe I used to know them and then forgot them… very likely!). For example `A` which lets you append to the end of the line. Awesome! I always did an awkward `$` and then went into insert mode to achieve the same thing that a simple capital A can achieve.

I always used `diX` (where X stands for a punctuation mark that has a partner) but Felipe said I could instead use `ciX` which stands for “change in”. It will put me in insert mode straight away. Same with “delete/change around…”. And something I didn’t know at all was that when using the “delete/change around/in…” it doesn’t always have to be content inside a punctuation mark that has a partner like brackets or quotes but you can also use `w` for word. So `ciw` will delete the word that the cursor is on and put you in insert mode. That’s cool.

Felipe also gave me the code to create a shortcut for running my Ruby tests. I always used `:! rspec spec` but now i can use `<leader>t` which is easier.

During my IPM Jim checked my vim setup and noticed that the test result take over the whole screen, which is a bit impractical because really I want to look at my code and the tests at the same time. So I need to find a way to do that. I know that some of the other apprentices use tmux, so maybe I should do the same.

Ultimately, doing this kata was more about learning vim and refining my vim setup then anything else!

And by the way, I haven’t managed to get it down to under 6 minutes… <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=13BcTI02eMU" target="_blank"> 6:41 during my last attempt!</a>