---
title: Strategy pattern
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2
category: apprenticeship
---

On Saturday I went to the London Software Craftsmanship Open Space event. It was fantastic!

One of the sessions that I attended was about taking encapsulation in OO to the extreme. We discussed what the pros and cons of this approach are.

<!--break-->

The idea was that we should not expose any data from an object under any circumstances but instead send messages between the objects. Now, this is something that I’ve been told at 8th Light as well: do not expose the internals of an object.

But in this extreme form that we discussed on Saturday, you shouldn’t even have if/else or case statements because that means that you’re violating this rule. A case statement could be replaced by polymorphism but an if/else statement? How can you code without using if/else statements? Apparently it would work when using the strategy design pattern instead.

I wasn’t aware of this pattern before that session on Saturday. I discussed it a bit with Ced  after the session and he explained it to me. From what I understood, it is basically something like polymorphism but for algorithms instead of objects.

I researched it a bit more today. Basically, when using the Strategy pattern, a class behaviour or algorithm is changed at run time. I guess that’s like changing the object that is passed in at run time when using the polymorphism approach.

I found a [good code example online](http://www.tutorialspoint.com/design_pattern/strategy_pattern.htm) which made it really easy for me to understand. 

Then I thought about how I could relate the Strategy pattern to my Tic Tac Toe. And I guess I could use the pattern for the different player types that I have in my Tic Tac Toe: computer player, human web player, human console player, random player. At the moment, these are all separate classes and the different player objects are passed into the `game.play` method at run time. All classes have a `make_move` method, so the game knows to call that method and depending on which players are passed in, the method will be called on the correct player. This concept is called polymorphism. If I used the Strategy pattern, I could have only one player class with a changing algorithm for its `make_move` method.

I think that would make it harder to test though and maybe a bit more confusing to understand my application.

Anyway, at least I know what the Strategy pattern is now!