---
title: JavaFX - Rabea, Rabea - JavaFX. Nice to meet you. Not!
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2
category: apprenticeship
---
The GUI is upon me! I remember when I first started at 8th Light in November, Georgina and Sarah were working on creating a GUI with JavaFX. They talked about it every day in our stand up and what they said went straight over my head. By then I was still struggling to follow along Uncle Bob’s Java code for the Prime Factors kata. But now my time has come to create a GUI as well! I feel very grown up. And also a bit scared. As it turns out, rightly so.

<!--break-->

In my IPM yesterday I tried to understand what JavaFX is. I mean, I understand front end in web but I have never worked with a desktop application GUI framework. So, what is it?

Contrary to what its name suggests, JavaFX has nothing to do with foreign exchange. But at least it has to do with Java, so the naming isn’t completely wrong. Maybe it does some special FX? Like it can drive a burning car and it can make genuine looking unicorns gallop across the screen. We’ll see.

My task for today was to spend half a day on implementing a simple GUI with a button that increments a counter on each click using JavaFX. And of course this needs to be fully tested!

I read a few short tutorials and got the button and functionality up and running quite quickly. But I had no idea how to test it now. I asked Georgina for help and she told me that I should wrap any JavaFX specific elements in an object so that I can have control over it. I didn’t really know how to do it, so I first tried to extend the JavaFX Label class with my own class and then override the methods for my test. But that didn’t work because all JavaFX methods are final.

So I asked Georgina again to show me how to wrap the element. Basically, to wrap the Label class, she created a new class called `MyJavaFXLabel`, then created a field variable called `label` for a new `Label` (which is in this case the built in JavaFX `Label` type Label). And then she created the method `setText()`, which has the same name as the actual method `setText()` in the `Label` class that I’m using in my business logic. Inside that method she put `label.setText()`. So it’s just calling the real method inside that other method with the same name.

Now that we had that new `MyJavaFXLabel` class, Georgina was able to create a `LabelInterface` which is implemented by the `MyJavaFXLabel` class. The class that currently depends on the `Label` now can depend on the `LabelInterface` instead. For the test I can create a `FakeLabel` class which also overrides the `setText()` method.

And the test passes!

But the application doesn’t run anymore. I don’t understand the error message and Google hasn’t helped. I asked Georgina for help again but she wasn’t sure why it didn’t work. I used the fxml file to create the “front end” code and I think that’s where I’m getting an error now. Georgina had done it in a different way for her application a few months ago so wasn't sure how the fxml worked.

I’ve been trying to understand what the issue is and how I can fix it but I’m not really getting anywhere. So I thought I’d take a break from it and write this blog post about it. Maybe it helps.

The options I see at the moment are to either change my code to implement the GUI elements with Java code rather than through that fxml file like Georgina has done. Or I’ll ask Sarah for help when she is finished with her IPM because apparently she used the fxml file. Or I’ll just stop here? After all this exercise was time boxed to half a day and I’ve already spent more time on it.

The purpose of it was to help me estimate how long it would take me to implement a JavaFX GUI for my existing Tic Tac Toe. Well, seems like this will be a nightmare. Plus Jim has already indicated that it won’t be easy. So that estimate is going to be high!