---
title: Setting up Cucumber tests
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2.5
category: apprenticeship
---

I mentioned to my mentors that I hadn’t really done acceptance testing before. I understand what it is but I’ve never actually written and implemented an acceptance test.

<!--break-->

Therefore I was required to implement a 4x4 board using the Cucumber acceptance test framework in this iteration. Jim was adamant that I shouldn’t use Capybara because it causes the tests being too closely coupled to the front end.

When I was googling around on how to set up Cucumber, almost all blogposts and tutorials I could find included Capybara. So I was already fearing the worst… how would I ever figure out how this works without Capybara?

Well, I’d forgotten that we’re talking about the Ruby eco-system here. Where a lot of things are a lot easier than they seem!

To get started, first you have to install the gem.

`gem install cucumber`

This will create a new directory in your project. The directory is called `features`.

The project then looks something like this:

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
-bin/
-features/
	-step_definitions/
	-support
-lib
-spec
your_other_files

</code></pre>

Inside the features directory you need to create a new file with the name of your feature and the ending `.feature`.

In my case, I needed to implement a 4x4 size board for my Tic Tac Toe. So I called the file `four_by_four_board.feature`.

Inside that file you need to write your test in plain English. Each line of that test has to start with [a specific keyword](https://cucumber.io/docs/reference#gherkin), so that Cucumber knows how to execute the line.

Here's my first test as an example:

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
Feature: Four by four board
  A player can play the game on a four by four board.

Scenario: First player wins
    Given an empty four by four board
    When the first player chooses the first position in the first row
    And the second player chooses the last position in the first row
    And the first player chooses the first position in the second row
    And the second player chooses the last position in the second row
    And the first player chooses the first position in the third row
    And the second player chooses the last position in the third row
    And the first player chooses the first position in the last row
    Then the first player wins.
    
</code></pre>

And then you can already run your tests with the command `cucumber`!

As none of the tests have actually been implemented with code, you get a lot of friendly suggestions from Cucumber as to how you should implement each line.

For the first line "Given an empty four by four board" cucumber will give you this output:

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
You can implement step definitions for undefined steps with these snippets:

Given(/^an empty four by four board$/) do
  pending # Write code here that turns the phrase above into concrete actions
end

</code></pre>

But where do you put the implementation? They keyword here is "step definitions". Earlier Cucumber generated a folder with that name.

So inside that folder, I created a file named `four_by_four_board.rb` and pasted Cucumber's suggestion for the first step into it. 

I removed the "pending" and the comment and instead wrote the code for creating a 4x4 board.

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
Given(/^an empty four by four board$/) do
  @board = Board.new(4)
end

</code></pre>

And when I then ran cucumber again, the first step went green. Great!

One thing to remember is to save the objects or any output that you want to reuse for another step inside an instance variable. That way other steps can access the information.

Cucumber know that the last line that starts with "Then" is where you want to make your test assertion. The other steps are mainly setup.

So my last test for the "Then" line looked something like this. 


<pre><code class="language-ruby">
Then(/^the first player wins\.$/) do
  new_board = Game.new.play({Marks::X => @player1, Marks::O => @player2}, @board, FakeUi.new)
  expect(new_board.winner_mark).to eq Marks::X
end

</code></pre>

All in all, it was surprisingly easy to do. Unless I've done it wrong, of course... Let's see what kind of feedback I get in my IPM tomorrow morning.