---
title: Logging with the composite pattern
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2
category: apprenticeship
---


I think today I implemented a design pattern for the first time! Actually, I’ve used the factory pattern before but according to Head First Design Patterns, it’s not a real pattern. But I don’t think I’ve ever consciously used a different pattern.

<!--break-->
Felipe asked me to research the composite pattern and use it to implement the logging functionality in my HTTP server code.

To make the Fitness test suite pass, I just stored the requests that needed to be logged in memory and returned them. But Felipe asked me to instead write the logs to a file and also print them to the console.

In using the composite pattern for this, the client, in this case the ServerWorker, still only calls `logger.log(requestLine)`. But instead of keeping the logs in memory, now two things happen: the logs are written to the file and they are printed to the console. And the ServerWorker has no idea about it! Here's the method that does the work of coordinating requests and responses and logging.
 
<pre><code class="language-java">
public class ServerWorker implements Runnable {
    //some setup

    @Override
    public void run() {
        HttpRequest request = socketReader.read();
        logger.log(request.requestLine().asString());
        Controller controller = router.getController(request);
        HttpResponse httpResponse = controller.dispatch(request);
        socketWriter.write(httpResponse.asBytes());
    }
}

</code></pre>

But behind the scenes, the ServerWorker is actually dealing with the `MultiLogger`. And that is basically an aggregate of the `FileLogger` and the `ConsoleLogger`. All three of those classes implement the `Logger` interface which has two methods.

<pre><code class="language-java">
public interface Logger {
    void log(String message);
    String getLogs();
}

</code></pre>

Except that the `MultiLogger` calls these methods on each of the other two loggers. And the other two loggers do the actual tasks of logging and getting the logs in their own special ways.

<pre><code class="language-java">
public class MultiLogger implements Logger {
    private List&lt;Logger&gt; existingLoggers = new ArrayList&lt;&gt;();

    @Override
    public void log(String message) {
        for (Logger logger : existingLoggers) {
            logger.log(message);
        }
    }

    @Override
    public String getLogs() {
        String logs = "";
        for (Logger logger : existingLoggers) {
            logs += logger.getLogs();
        }
        return logs;
    }

    public void add(Logger ... loggers) {
        for (Logger logger : loggers) {
            existingLoggers.add(logger);
        }
    }
}

</code></pre>

But for that to work, the other two loggers first need to be added to the `MultiLogger` (note the last method `add(Logger ... loggers)`). 

It works fine if you follow the process to add the other loggers first. But it did make me wonder - what if other developers take over this code base and don't know that they have to register the other loggers first? If you write a test for the `MultiLogger`, nothing tells you that you have to register other loggers. And you could probably expect from the `MultiLogger` to do some logging and to get the logs. But none of that will work if you haven't first registered the `FileLogger`.

Or maybe I'm thinking about it the wrong way. Maybe you can't expect that from the `MultiLogger` but instead you should test that it calls the methods on other logger objects. But the client of `MultiLogger`, the `ServerWorker`, does expect it to do the logging, without knowing about the ins and outs of registering other loggers.

Hm, I'm not sure about this. Maybe it's just a trade-off that I have to make when I want to use the composite pattern and hide the other loggers behind the `MultiLogger`. Or have I misunderstood it?
