---
title: Pry
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 1
category: apprenticeship
---

Today’s Zagaku was about the IRB alternative Pry, a Ruby interactive Shell. I’ve been using Pry ever since I started learning Ruby at General Assembly over a year ago but I only ever used it for debugging my code, together with Pry-Byebug which let’s you step through and into your methods.

<!--break-->

But it turns out that there is a lot more that you can do with Pry which I had no idea about!

For example you can use the command `ls -M` which will show you all instance methods that are available for the current context. Similarly you can use `ls -m` which will list all class methods. You can also use Unix commands to move into a class (`cd ClassName`) and when you're inside the class you can use `ls` to list all the methods of that class. I wish I’d known that before!

You can also use Unix commands starting with a `.`, which let you navigate around your normal Shell outside Pry.

Something that I found really interesting - although it’s probably not that useful - is that Pry suppresses the return statement when you add a semi-colon at the end of the line. 

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
[3] pry(String):1> puts "hello"
hello
=> nil
[4] pry(String):1> puts "hello";
hello

</code></pre>

Maybe I’ll file that piece of insight in the pub quiz trivia section of my brain (which is very small at the moment). Although I don't know how many programming related pub quizzes there are. Anyway.

I’m really looking forward to writing Ruby at some point again. I assume it will take a while until I get to that stage though, so for now: back to Java.