---
title: Back to Java!
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 1
category: apprenticeship
---

I had my IPM today and received some Java stories in preparation for having to write the HTTP server next week.

<!--break-->

Luckily Felipe and Jim were happy with the request that I had made a few weeks ago to get some time to refresh my Java memory. So Felipe dreamt up a task that he said would “give me more confidence about the HTTP server - or crush it”. Great! Hopefully it’s the former.

I’ll have to write two applications - one server that listens to a client on a port and a client that can give information to the server and receive information from the server. When Felipe described this to me, I really had no idea whatsoever how I would achieve such a thing.

But I received a hint: Java has the classes `Socket` and `ServerSocket` which do a lot of the things that I couldn’t imagine. Like connecting the application to a port. Or sending and receiving information through the network. All done by the Java socket sisters.

I already had a read of the tutorials on the Oracle website and it doesn’t seem too bad.

Sockets are endpoints for communication between two computers. The class `Socket` is used for the client and the `ServerSocket` for the server.

Each small application does a combination of opening a connection, opening an input stream and an output stream, reading and writing data by using these streams and then closing first the streams and then the socket.

I’ll have a go at spiking these now and if it’s straight forward, I might reduce the estimates on the stories in Artisan to fit some extra features into my iteration.