---
title: Oh. My. Zsh. Bye.
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 3
category: apprenticeship
---

Today I finished up the human vs random game mode of my Tic Tac Toe and then tackled my last story for this iteration: getting rid of oh-my-zsh.

<!--break-->

I'd left this story for last because I knew it would be a pain to figure out. And of course, as soon as I made any changes to my shell set up, everything broke. Looking back - maybe it was a self-fulfilling prophecy! 


So I spent some time googling around, banging my head against the wall... stuff like that. Luckily Skim had offered his help, so I took him up on it. He was able to figure it all out in about 20 minutes. We got rid of most of oh-my-zsh and only kept three files which give me my shell colour scheme, the command prompt and some cool git extras.

So the whole time in the back of my mind I wondered: why??? Why can’t I just use the pre-configured oh-my-zsh? It worked fine!

Well, mostly... What initially prompted my mentors to give me the task to get rid of oh-my-zsh and use my own shell configuration was that a couple of Emacs key bindings didn’t work. The reason was that I had switched on vim key bindings in my terminal, which led to things like `ctrl + p` (to repeat the previous command) and `ctrl + r` (reverse lookup of previously used commands) not working.

I simply deleted that line of code that switched on the vim key bindings from my .zshrc (I didn’t use vim features in my shell anyway) and voila… everything back to normal.

Yet I still had the task of getting rid of oh-my-zsh. Hrmpf.

## Why?

Every time I don’t understand something and then write a blog post about it, I understand it afterwards. So I’ll give it a try. Let's answer the "why?".

Firstly, what is oh-my-zsh? It’s a framework to manage your Z shell configuration. It comes with a lot of cool things like different colour themes and special shortcuts and targeted set up for all sorts of programming languages. I was using it because on the first day of my web development course, I was told to set up my laptop with it. And it worked absolutely fine for me! So I never questioned it.

Which I think is the first problem: not questioning it. I didn’t really have any idea what it did. Which I guess is fine for an absolute beginner - you have to trust your teacher and follow what they say to get started somehow. But now that I know a little bit more, it makes sense that I don’t blindly install tools without understanding them.

On the other hand - we often use frameworks without understanding every single detail about them. For example JavaFX - I know how to use some of it, but I don’t know how it works. I haven't looked at the code implementation of it. So why shouldn’t I do exactly the same with my shell configuration?

I guess there would be an issue if something seriously broke in my terminal which was related to the framework - I would have no idea how to fix it. Although I did have auto-updates turned off (on recommendation of my GA instructor), so the likelihood of something suddenly breaking was low. But if it had come to a serious problem, I would have been completely lost.

That said - I was also pretty lost setting up my terminal without just pulling in oh-my-zsh and had to ask Skim for help. But at least it wasn’t an emergency situation.

Another issue with oh-my-zsh was that I had downloaded over 100 plug ins - but I was only using the git plugin. So I had a lot of useless code on my machine. And the more code there is, the more difficult it is to maintain. But I wasn’t using any of the code, never looked at it, never updated it… No maintenance necessary! And it was just text files, so it wasn’t using a lot of space on my hard drive or anything.

Hm, I'm still not convinced that using oh-my-zsh is such a bad thing. 

I understand that I'm here to learn as much as I can - so this exercise has definitely made me more aware of which configuration file does what in my terminal. So in that sense it was good to do it. I learnt more about the shell configuration.

So maybe the answer to my "why" is not that oh-my-zsh is a generally a bad thing, maybe the answer is "to practise setting up my terminal".

OK, I can live with that answer.