---
title: Pairing with a real craftsman
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 1
category: apprenticeship
---

This morning Daniel offered that one of us apprentices could pair with him on the client project he is currently working on. And as my story that I worked on this morning seemed to be going faster than I had estimated, I jumped at the opportunity. I hadn’t paired with him before and it was really interesting to see how he works.

<!--break-->

The project that Daniel and two other craftsman are working on involves replacing part of a large system for a large company. Large is the keyword here - there are so many different systems working together, it’s hard to keep track. Daniel is very comfortable jumping around all the different code bases and gems and knows exactly which commands he needs to enter to build which part of the system… all very confusing to me! But then Daniel has been working on this project for months now, so I guess he's had some time to get used to it.

He started off by giving me an overview over the whole project, so that I was able to vaguely understand what the story was that we were working on.

But while he was introducing the system to me, we came across a little bug. So before working on the story, we fixed it. It turned out to be a tiny little missing method in the replacement system that another part of the code was calling. It was in the old system, so we added it to the new system.

Then we worked on the story. Well, Daniel worked on it and explained to me what he was doing. I wrote some tiny bits of code after he explained to me what it needed to do. It was really interesting and really fun! I'm actually quite looking forward to working on something other than Tic Tac Toe one day...