---
title: Talk and review board in one day
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 1
category: apprenticeship
---

Today is quite an eventful day for me today!

<!--break-->

At lunch time I held my talk about my apprenticeship and I think overall it went down well. I got loads of really good feedback as well. For example that I was sometimes using terminology wrong or that I didn’t explain something detailed enough.

I’ve already updated my presentation to take the feedback into account and feel relatively confident about giving the talk at the Ladies of Code meetup at Twitter in a couple of weeks.

I also completed the Elixir koans today. Most of them were not too hard to figure out, except the ones about Processes and Tasks. The koans were good to get an overview of the language but I don’t feel confident yet that I could actually write an Elixir programme.

So my plan of action is to go through the “Programming Elixir” book and follow along with the examples.

This afternoon I also have my first mini review board. I handed in my code for the contacts management system on Wednesday and several craftsmen have reviewed it and will give me feedback on it shortly. All the apprentices who have gone through this process before said it was really beneficial to them, so while I’m also a little nervous, I’m looking forward to it at the same time.

I’m pretty confident that a user can't break my application. I really can't think of any eventuality where it would break. But I fear that the craftsmen will figure out a way to break it… Let’s see. Fingers crossed they don’t!