---
title: Java web Tic Tac Toe
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 1
category: apprenticeship
---


This morning I tried to get my head around how my Java Tic Tac Toe could possibly work with my HTTP Server so that I could play a game in the web browser.

<!--break-->

The first story that I wanted to tackle was creating a jar. I just added the maven jar plugin to the pom.xml and I could run it. I created a separate Main class for web and started thinking about which other classes I would need. I would structure it similar to the JavaFX part of the application, except that it will need to display web templates instead of the JavaFX Gui.

When Felipe and I discussed the story to create a TTT jar during my IPM, I think we said that I should strip out all the JavaFX related code. But I don’t really see why it’s necessary. I already have a `ConsoleMain` and a `GuiMain`, which both use some classes from the core application and some classes specific to the user interface. The user starts one or the other main, depending on if they want to play the game in the GUI or in the console. So I think I can just do the same with the web version and just use a third Main class.

Then I started to think about how my TTT would interact with the HTTP server. So far I understood that my server can have a client that makes requests (which was the Fitness Test suite so far) and the server will send responses.

Cool, so I thought instead my Tic Tac Toe will somehow make requests. And the server will give it a response. Kind of like with JavaFX, if a user clicks on an empty cell, it sends a post request with the mark and cell number in the body to the server, the server will respond, my TTT will play one round of the game and the page will get updated accordingly.

But which application will provide the HTML? Does the server respond with the correct HTML? Or are the templates in the TTT?

I asked Danny the question and it turned out that I had thought about it all wrong. The client is the browser and not the TTT. Instead, I should consider the TTT as an extension of the HTTP server. So if the server receives a GET request to `/game`, for example, which would be made form the browser, then the server will route to the correct controller (that I need to implement) and the controller will then delegate the dealing with any response (e.g. HTML templates) to my TTT application.

Now it makes more sense.