---
title: Semantic version numbers
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2
category: apprenticeship
---

Jan Lehnhard talked about semantic versioning during his talk at NodeConf and I thought it would make a good blog post!

<!--break-->

So what is semantic versioning?

A semantic version number consists of three parts. Here’s an example:

`1.0.9`

Each of the three numbers has a different meaning.

Let’s start from the right. The last digit is increased when a bug fix is deployed. It doesn’t introduce any new features, it just corrects the behaviour of the existing code. And the code change has to be backwards compatible. 

If we released a patch, our new version number will look like this:

`1.0.10`

In theory each slot of the version number can be increased into the tens, hundreds, etc. You might think that instead of going up to 10, the second number is increased, but any of the numbers to the left of the number that is increased are not affected. 

The second number is called the minor version number and it will be increased when a new feature is added. Again, the API has to be backwards compatible when this version number is increased. Any developer who upgrades to this new version needs to trust that it doesn't contain any breaking changes.

So, if we release a new feature, the version number will now look like this.

`1.2.0`

The patch version number is reset to 0 when the minor version number is increased.

Lastly we have the first number, which is the major version number. This number needs to be increased when a release leads to incompatible API changes. If a developer upgrades to this version, then they will have trouble with their existing code as the API contract will have changed. 

If we have a major release with breaking changes, we need to increase our number to this:

`2.0.0`

The second and last number are reset to 0 again.

There are some more [detailed specifications online](http://semver.org/) for the usage of semantic versioning.

## Why use semantic versioning?

Out of courtesy to other developers! Semantic versioning is important when creating libraries that are used by other developers. If other people know that they can rely on the version number, they can safely upgrade the library and keep using it in their code without any problems if only the minor or the patch version numbers were increased. And when the major version number is increased they will know that the API contract has changed and that upgrading will be a lot more work as it will probably break a lot of code in the existing project.

However, when the version numbers aren’t used correctly, it can be a real problem for other developers who are relying on the code in their own project.