---
title: Apprenticeship patterns book review
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 3
category: apprenticeship
---

At the weekend I finished reading the book “Apprenticeship Patterns - Guidance for the Aspiring Software Craftsman”. I didn't really know what to expect with this book and I have to say that overall I found it quite inspiring!

<!--break-->

The book talks about patterns that you should follow as an aspiring software craftsperson. Someone like me! 

By "patterns" they mean pieces of advice on how to turn around an unfavourable situation that you’re in. For example, if you feel like you can’t learn any new things at work, work on a pet project outside work. If you feel like you’re not learning enough, start writing down what you’re learning. If you don’t even know where to start with all these books that you should be reading, ask craftsmen about which books they recommend and make a reading list. If you feel like  you can't contribute to a project at work because you don’t have enough experience, find a task that is basic and no one likes to do and do it to  your best ability. Things like that. You get the idea.

A lot of the patterns in the book seemed very familiar... Because they are part of my own apprenticeship. For example working alongside the craftsmen and learning from them, pairing with them, working on a project that I can break and learn from in a safe environment (hello Tic Tac Toe!), recording what I learn in my blog and sharing what I learn with others. 

And finally the journeyman apprenticeship option on the 8th Light website makes sense to me! The book is comparing a software apprenticeship with the medieval craftsman apprenticeships. You know, back in the day when a young lad would have done menials tasks for a master and over years learnt his craft from him. And then he would move around different cities for a few years as a journeyman (!) to learn more from other masters but also help distribute knowledge outside their home towns. And finally he would become a master himself.

The book does make the caveat that this is just the inspiration for the software craftsman apprenticeship and it obviously doesn’t work like this anymore during modern times. A master can't really own an apprentice in the same way that it used to be the case.

Even though a lot of the patterns and advice made sense in the book, somehow I didn’t feel like I completely bought into all the ideas and concepts. I couldn’t quite put my finger on it but I felt like there was something a bit off. When writing this blog post, it became clear to me. I think it’s the fact that it's never mentioned that the apprentice should question what they are taught. It’s always very much about “just follow the craftsmen’s guidance” but never about switching on your own brain and comparing all the options or taking the advice you get with a pinch of salt.

It's a long time ago but in highschool for example, I feel like critical thinking was an important part of the curriculum. So I grew up with this in my mind. But it doesn’t seem to have the same importance in the book, unless I missed that bit. I stand to be corrected on this one of course.

Another thing that didn’t sit quite right was how they often used “she” and “her” as pronouns but all quotes in the book were from men. So I guess the authors still haven’t really clocked the diversity thing. But they tried. Along the same lines it annoyed me a bit that they often referred to an apprentice as being young and/or straight out of uni.

Anyway, I can ignore that and focus on the things that I learnt from the book.

Some of the patterns that I thought were quite interesting were about reading. It says an apprentice should always read. And they, I mean "she" (haha), should favour books over blog posts or articles, and favour older books over more recent ones. I’ve started to create a software development related reading list as per the recommendation of the book, too (yes, dear reader, you might be shocked but I didn’t have a reading list until now!). I feel like it’s also a good way to keep track of all the books I’ve already read, not only those that I want to read.

I also really liked the pattern about being the worst. You should always try to be the worst in your team or company. Because the best way to learn is from people who are better than you. And if you feel like you're not the worst anymore, move teams to be the worst again.

There’s also a pattern about exposing your own ignorance. If you are asked to deliver a project with a technology that you don’t know, be honest and say that you’re in the process of learning it. Don’t pretend that you know it. 

The book says that your client will trust you more and the relationship will grow stronger if you are honest and they see your learning progress. I guess as long as you deliver in the end! That’s what I like so much about 8th Light: nobody feels like they need to pretend that they know something. Or that they need to take the stage for themselves and show how great they are.

At the end of the book the authors conclude that there are no true masters in the software industry yet. Very interesting! Their reasoning is that the industry is too young to have produced masters yet. All the really good developers are still at the journeymen stage. Personally, I’m not sure if this reason is correct. Maybe the real reason is that technology is constantly changing and evolving so we have to keep learning and will never be master-like.

Ha! Critical thinking! I've done it again...