---
title: Writing data to a file in Ruby - yaml vs json
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 1
category: apprenticeship
---

Today I am working on saving contact details to a file and reading them from a file again. I hadn’t done this before, so I did a bit of research over the weekend.

<!--break-->

It doesn’t seem too difficult at all and the only question that I was pondering in my mind was which file format I should use. My first instinct told me json, as I’ve worked with json files a lot in the past when I worked on JavaScript applications. All my contact details are saved in a Ruby hash, which looks a bit like a JavaScript object, so I thought that makes sense.

But then there’s also yaml and it seems like a lot of Ruby applications always have yaml files. So maybe it would be more semantic to use yaml?

I wasn’t sure, so I decided to ask my mentors, if they had any special requirements. I guess that’s what you do when you’re working on a client project, right? If you’re not sure, you can ask the client.

Well, they didn’t have any special requirements. As long as the data was persisted somehow, they didn’t care how I achieved it.

I played around with creating a json file and reading from it. But I realised that when my application parses the json data into a Ruby hash, both the keys and the values are strings. But the data format that I’ve been using requires the keys to be symbols and only the values to be strings.

I was about to create a method that formats the hash keys correctly but then thought I’d look at yaml again. And, lo and behold, yaml understands Ruby symbols! So if I save the data to a yaml file and then read and parse the data, what comes back is the Ruby hash in the correct format with keys as symbols.

Cool! So that’s my decision made then: I’m using yaml.