---
title: Slowly leaving Java behind for now...
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 1.5
category: apprenticeship
---

I just had my IPM where I demoed the styled JavaFX Gui and the ability to play against an unbeatable UI player through the Gui. I’m really happy that I’ve managed to implement all of these things now after the somewhat rocky start with JavaFX.

<!--break-->

Towards the end of the IPM Jim asked if I’d done enough Java now. I wasn’t sure if this was a rhetorical question so I didn’t really know what to reply… How do you know if you’ve done enough Java? I’ll probably never do enough Java in my life!

But Jim seemed to think it was enough to begin with and said I’ll move on to Ruby next. Yay!! I miss Ruby! I’m so excited that I can go back to my first love. I’ll still need to fix a few things in my Java TTT application and write a blog post about the `clone()` method in Java but then I’m moving on to Ruby.

I’m supposed to screen record or live perform the prime numbers kata in Ruby in my next iteration. This was the first kata I ever did in Java, when I basically typed up Uncle Bob’s slides and wondered what the heck was going on. Haaahh… back in the day!

And Ruby means that I’ll need to use vim! I’m quite excited about that because I feel like I’m missing out at the moment. All the other apprentices have all these cool vim setups and talk about vim shortcuts. Now I can finally join that club.

Luckily I’ve already started learning vim some time ago when I my application for the apprenticeship was accepted. There wasn’t much work on in my old job during that time, so I thought I might as well make the little work last longer by typing it in vim. My colleagues (all Sublime users) thought I was absolutely mental. When I told them that all my new colleagues are vim users, they were very impressed by how hardcore everyone here is. Hehehehe!

I’m also happy about that my next iteration is a bit less intense compared to other recent ones. For each of the stories I know pretty much how to go about completing them. Not like a couple of weeks ago when I had no idea how to even approach JavaFX.

I also need to prepare and present a Zagaku, which I think I’ll do on CSS flex-box. I’ve used it for a few projects before but I feel like I don’t know its full capacity yet, so the Zagaku will be a good excuse to research it and play with it a bit more.