---
title: Elixir pattern matching and maps
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2
category: apprenticeship
---

I’ve been learning more use cases for pattern matching in Elixir, and one of them is to check if certain keys in a map have any or a specific entry.

<!--break-->

Let’s say we have a map

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
person = %{ name: "Fred", height: 1.82 }

</code></pre>

To check if a specific key exists in the map, we can try to match it with another map that contains that key. Let’s say we want to check the person's weight.

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
%{ weight: a_weight } = person

# MatchError

</code></pre>

This will give a MatchError, because the person doesn’t have a weight associated to them.

However, if we try to match it with another map that contains the name key, it will work.

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
%{ name: a_name } = person

</code></pre>

If we now want to know the name that is associated to the `name` key,  we just need to enter a_name. And it will give us the name “Fred”.

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
iex(3)> a_name
"Fred"

</code></pre>

But that seems kind of a round-about way of doing it. This works just as well.

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
iex(4)> person[:name]
"Fred"

</code></pre>

This was an example from the "Programming Elixir" book which I'm following at the moment. I am not 100% sure why you would use pattern matching instead of accessing the key directly. Unless this example was just an illustration for learning purposes?

Then I read another example in “Programming Elixir”, where the author uses pattern matching to iterate over a list of maps. I’ll recreate this with a slightly different example:

We have a list of person maps.

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
people = [
 %{name: "Fred", height: 1.82},
 %{name: "Wilma", height: 1.58},
 %{name: "Barney", height: 1.62},
 %{name: "Bamm-Bamm", height: 0.8},
]

</code></pre>

And then we iterate over the list and pattern match against the height key of each map.

For example we could say we only want to print the name of those people who are taller than 1.6m.

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
for person = %{ height: height } <- people,
  height > 1.6,
  do: IO.puts person[:name]

#  Fred
#  Barney

</code></pre>

OK, so that’s useful. But I tested it out without pattern matching and it still gives the same result of printing “Fred” and “Barney”.

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
for person <- people,
  person[:height ]> 1.6,
  do: IO.puts person[:name]
  
#  Fred
#  Barney

</code></pre>

So I’m still not really sure why you would use pattern matching instead but I guess it’s good to know both ways of doing it. And once I know the language better, maybe it will all become clear to me.