---
title: The F-word
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2
category: apprenticeship
---
Our instructor at General Assembly taught us that a developer needs to be able to deal with __FAILURE__. Because you will fail and fail and fail again. And if you can’t take that, then you will have a tough time as a developer.

<!--break-->

I think maybe I’d forgotten that over the last few months. I felt that things were going pretty well here at 8th Light. Of course I had to learn a lot of new things all the time but I never felt like I was completely out of my depth. Somehow I was always able to get my stories done, sometimes even ahead of time. Even implementing the minimax algorithm -  it was painful but at least I knew what it was and how I should approach it.

But JavaFX is different. I’ve been looking at this code for days now and my progress is so slow! For example, yesterday I tried for an hour to add a stylesheet to the project but always got an error. Then I gave up. It shouldn't take so long to include a stylesheet!

To add insult to injury, today’s Zagaku was practising how to juggle. Christoph said that we should all learn it as it’s a great way to relax for a few minutes and take your mind of a problem that you’re working on. So he showed us how to get started: first practising a consistent throw with one ball, then with two and then with three. More failing. Juggling balls going all over the place. Ugh. I guess I’ll keep practising. I have a feeling that juggling can’t be as hard as implementing a JavaFX GUI.

Georgina gave me some GUI advice this morning. She showed me how she integrated her stylesheet (she's using a resources folder! Why didn't the internet tell me this yesterday?) and suggested to focus on a really basic approach for now. Not even use a Player class, for example, but just switch the mark around after each click.

I had previously tried to follow Felipe’s advice and implement classes that were similar to existing classes in my application. For example I already have a `ConsoleUI`, so Felipe suggested to create a `JavaFXUI` and connect those two with a `UserInterface` -Interface. Sounded sensible! But that restricted me in how I wanted to implement certain behaviour and I found it really hard to get anything working because I was lacking objects or data at certain points. It felt like I was artifically cramming my code into existing methods that weren't really fit for my purpose.

So in my desperation I just decided to make it work - no matter how, I needed to get some basic functionality up and running today. And I managed. BUT: I had to remove some of the interface implementations that I had before, I’m not using my actual Game class at all and I’m lacking some tests. It’s a spike more than anything else but I feel quite relieved that I got something up and running.

My IPM is tomorrow afternoon, so my plan until then is to improve the code. I’ll start by drawing out my UML diagram and then check which methods I need to test, where I can use more abstractions and maybe where I can implement interfaces again that I took out to make it work. 

