---
title: Ruby multiplication generator without each loops
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2
category: apprenticeship
---

Today I wrote my first Ruby programme in a while. It was so nice to start afresh! And in a weird way I’m really enjoying using vim. I guess I just get easily excited by new things. I’m sure the novelty will wear off soon. But first let me quickly install this one plugin… oh and what does this one do? Wow, that’s a great shortcut! I better remap the keys to this instead…

<!--break-->

Whooops! Sorry, I’m back from the rabbit hole. Very easy to get sucked into this.

The code I wrote today was for a programme that generates multiplications of numbers with each other up to a certain number that the user can enter. So if you enter “2”, then you get this:

<pre><code class="language-java">
0 x 0 = 0
0 x 1 = 0
0 x 2 = 0
1 x 0 = 0
1 x 1 = 1
1 x 2 = 2
2 x 0 = 0
2 x 1 = 2
2 x 2 = 4

</code></pre>

If you enter 748, then you get... Just kidding, I won't actually paste the output in here.

It didn't find it overly difficult to get the functionality working with two nested `.each` loops.

*However*, the requirement is that I’m not allowed to use any `.each` or `for` loops. Instead I'm supposed to use the other Ruby Enumerable methods. 

I thought I’ll get the tests passing the easier way first and then see how I can refactor. I’ve been pondering about which Enumerable method to use for a while now, reading the documentation from top to bottom, bottom to top but I haven’t really had a eureka moment yet. For now I’ve just changed the each loops to `.map` which works fine and fulfills the requirements but I’m not sure if that’s creative enough…

I’ll keep thinking about it and see if I can come up with something else. Unless you, dear reader, have an idea? [Here's the code.](https://github.com/RabeaGleissner/multiplications-generator/blob/master/lib/multiplication_generator.rb) (Crowd sourcing code! How about that??!)