---
title: I think my methods know too much
comments: false
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2
category: apprenticeship
---

Just a quick check-in while I’m working on my TTT. Yesterday, I started working on the unbeatable computer player. I haven’t started on the Minimax algorithm itself yet but I’ve written the methods that it needs to work. For example a scoring method that will assign +10 for a winning game state, -10 for a losing game state and 0 for a draw.

<!--break-->
I’ve already got methods that figure out if the game is drawn or if there is a winner etc. So I thought I could just reuse the existing methods to identify if the game is won or drawn, for example. Slight issue there - all these methods are referring to the game state as a field variable of the Board. The Board is initialised with a game state of all empty cells and during the game, more and more marks are added to that cells array. And the methods all refer to that one array.

But now I need methods to evaluate a hypothetical game state instead of the actual game state. So I need to pass in a game state rather than the methods knowing about the game states by themselves. Argh! So I’m in a bit of a pickle at the moment because changing all the methods will be quite a large change in my application. I also have to change all the tests along with it.

An alternative would be to duplicate the methods that I need for the unbeatable computer player and pass the game state into those new methods. Before any of my 8th Light readers get a heart attack (like that time I wanted to use a test mocking library 😃) - don't worry, I won't follow this approach. I of course know that duplication is bad.

Another alternative would be to split the current methods into two: one that takes the game state as a parameter and one that calls the method and passes in the game state. I did that the first time I noticed my predicament when I looked at the hasWinner() method. 

See what I did there? You’d hardly notice that it used to be one method before!

Before:
<pre><code class="language-java">
    public boolean hasWinner() {
        Cell[] gameState = gameState();
        for (int[] combo : WINNING_COMBINATIONS) {
            if (anyLineMatchesAWinningCombination(gameState, combo)) {
                return true;
            }
        }
        return false;
    }
    
    private Cell[] gameState() {
        return board.cells();
    }
</code></pre>

After:

_renamed hasWinner() to hasGameAWinner() and created another method that takes the game state as an argument, so that I can use that for my Minimax decision making._

<pre><code class="language-java">
public boolean hasGameAWinner() {
    Cell[] gameState = gameState();
    return isWinningState(gameState);
}

private boolean isWinningState(Cell[] gameState) {
    for (int[] combo : WINNING_COMBINATIONS) {
        if (anyLineMatchesAWinningCombination(gameState, combo)) {
            return true;
        }
    }
    return false;
}
</code></pre>

All tests are still passing without me having to adjust them.

But I don’t think I can get away with that… I can’t just split up all the methods that I need to evaluate the hypothetical game state. Or can I? Maybe I can! I mean, small methods = good methods, right? I don’t really know.

I have a feeling I’ll have to change all my methods to receive the game state through those little brackets after the method name rather than through telepathic knowledge of the actual current game state.

Which means I have to adjust all the tests, too. And all the method calls from other places in the code. Hrmpf.

Well, that reminds me of a piece of wisdom that my dad liked to tell me: Life doesn't only consist of fun.

Thanks, dad.