---
title: The Java memory model
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2
category: apprenticeship
---

I’ve heard the words "stack" and "heap" thrown around in conversations before but I never really understood what they meant. I knew that stack is some type of memory that can fill up and then you have a stack overflow, but that was about it.

<!--break-->

After my talk about autoboxing on Friday, Jim asked me to look into the Java memory model and what heap and stack were. I guess my lack of knowledge in that area was quite obvious! So I did some research and will try to explain how memory is allocated in Java and what the differences between heap and stack are.

## Heap memory

When a new object is instantiated, it is stored in heap memory. The heap memory exists the whole time that the application is running. It has global scope, so any part of the application can access it. For every object that is stored in the heap memory, there is a primitive reference in the stack memory. So basically a pointer to an object somewhere in the heap.

##Stack memory

Stack memory is allocated for the execution of a thread specifically. It stores local variables and method calls. Only primitive variables are stored in the stack. The scope is local, so only the method that the stack was allocated for can access the variables. The life span of stack memory is generally much shorter than heap memory.  As soon as the related method returns, the space in the stack becomes free and can be allocated to something else.

Stack memory allows for having a multi-threaded application, which means that several methods can be executed concurrently. Each thread has its own stack memory but all threads share the heap memory.

##Memory allocation

Both heap and stack memory are stored in the computer’s RAM but there is an important difference between how memory is allocated. The names already indicate how this works. I imagine the heap to just be a messy pile of data, from which you can pull out random bits of data and throw other bits back on. The stack is more organised, i.e. things are in an order, one on top of the other. For the stack, memory is allocated in “Last in first out" order, meaning that the most recently used block is always the first one that is freed up. That makes it faster than heap memory allocation because the stack pointer just needs to move up and down.

The heap memory doesn’t have a specific pattern of allocation and deallocation of memory. It can allocate a block at any time and free it at any time. And therefore it makes it more complex to keep track of used and unused space. That makes it slower than the stack memory.

The heap memory size is larger than the stack memory size. Stack size is fixed and can’t be extended once the process has started, which I assume is why only primitives can be stored in stack memory. Primitives have a certain allocated size, where as objects have infinite size, so that stack memory would be more likely to run out of space if it stored objects. Heap memory space is used by processes to get additional space at run-time.