---
title: Autoboxing in Java (or int vs Integer)
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2
category: apprenticeship
---

Today I’m doing a lightning talk about autoboxing in Java. And since I’ve already researched the topic, I thought I might as well use that material for today’s blog post. Efficiencies and all that.

<!--break-->

On Monday during my IPM, when Felipe looked at my code, he said something along the lines of “Why do you use Integer so much? There are too many Integers in your code. You should use more int!”. This isn’t a direct quote and what he said was in German anyway but it was something along those lines.

I had no idea what to reply other than “it works when I use Integer?!”. I didn’t really understand the difference between Integer and int. I mainly tried to use int where possible because it’s shorter (less typing!) but sometimes IntelliJ complains when I use int, so I just use Integer instead and that works. Fine with me! But the reason behind this? Not sure.

So Felipe asked me to research the topic of autoboxing and do a lightning talk about it.

##Boxing

Firstly it’s important to understand what boxing is. It is the process of placing a primitive type into an object. Primitive types are the lower case versions of all the types. And the uppercase (sometimes longer word) versions are objects that store a reference to the value. The primitive types store the values directly.

<pre><code class="language-java">
Primitive type    Wrapper class

boolean    -->    Boolean
byte       -->    Byte
char       -->    Character
float      -->    Float
int        -->    Integer
long       -->    Long
short      -->    Short
double     -->    Double

</code></pre>

There is also a process called unboxing, which is the opposite of boxing. It means getting the value back that is associated with the object.

##Autoboxing

Autoboxing is when boxing and unboxing happens automatically. This was introduced in Java 5.0. The developer can write something like this:

<pre><code class="language-java">
Integer k = 4;
int l = k;  

</code></pre>

And the compiler provides this source code automatically in the background. Which is mighty nice of the compiler.

<pre><code class="language-java">
Integer k = new Integer(4);
int l = k.intValue();

</code></pre>


##int vs Integer

But that still doesn’t tell us why Felipe was so against my more or less random use of Integers and ints. For that we need to understand an interesting behaviour of the reference variables (the upper case ones). As they are objects, they can be null.

Now if we take a boolean for example, which can be true or false, it is quite odd to also have the option null.

Reference variables can be null:

<pre><code class="language-java">
Boolean f = false;
Boolean t = true;
Boolean n = null;

</code></pre>

But primitive variables cannot be null:

<pre><code class="language-java">
boolean f = false;
boolean t = true;
//this does not exist: boolean n = null; 

</code></pre>

And it's the same for Integer. An integer should be a number so null doesn't really make sense. Having the option of null can lead to nasty null pointer errors. Therefore, it is better to use int whereever possible.

Unfortunately it is not always possible though. Some classes only work with other objects, for example `List<Integer>` or `Map<Integer>`. You can't store an `int` in a List for example.

And the reason why they only work with objects is that objects are interchangeable. Primitive variables are not interchangeable. But an Integer can be replaced with Object, for example. And that lets us use Java generics, for example with `List<T>`, where T must be a type that can be directly assigned to an Object. 


