---
title: A bad IPM with a positive outcome
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 3.5
category: apprenticeship
---
Today I threw away my JavaFX efforts and started again. Both Felipe and Jim had advised me to do that after I mentioned in my last blog post that I was thinking of tidying up the code and retro-fitting tests.

<!--break-->

Jim offered to pair with me this morning but unfortunately double booked himself. But he still spent some time with me to go through the steps I should take to test drive my code from scratch. That was really helpful and my head felt much clearer after talking to Jim.

So I started test-driving all my code and it wasn’t as hard as I thought it would be. I even managed to write tests for the display elements, for example checking how many buttons there were and what the text on the buttons was. So I thought I was making good progress until I came to a bit in my application where I felt like I needed a circular dependency. The View class was telling the Game class which position the user had chosen by clicking on a button. And the Game class needed to tell the View class to display a game-over message. Something wasn’t right.

I had my IPM late this afternoon and showed Jim my predicament. He said “when the dependencies go in the wrong direction we normally…?” Aaah! Yes! Dependency inversion!

My IPM didn’t go so well because I was mainly focused on JavaFX in the last few days and was hoping that Jim would help me with that during the IPM seeing that we couldn't really pair in the morning. Somehow I thought that because he knew that I was struggling a lot, that he would not expect me to have a normal IPM. But he still wanted me to present all the code that I had written for each story. 

In hindsight that makes sense because I guess the client doesn't care how much I struggle, they just want to see results. 

I had even deleted a branch that I should have shown, because the PR had already been reviewed by Felipe and Jim, so I thought I was done with that. Mental note to self: even if the code has already been reviewed and is merged, it still needs to be demoed during the IPM.

Jim explained to me that during the IPM I needed to make a slick presentation of everything that I had created during the iteration. I don’t know what I was thinking today - I can only put it down to another mentor/client confusion. From now on I will always consider Jim and Felipe as a client during the IPMs and will try to be as professional as I can be!

On the plus side, Jim suggested that I should attend a real client IPM tomorrow to see how 8th Light run their IPMs. I’m so excited! Maybe just as well that I messed this IPM up, otherwise I might not have gotten this opportunity.

## JavaFX struggles

I’ve been thinking about why I’m having such a hard time with JavaFX. I was expected to learn it during a spike in half a day and then implement it in my application within 3 days or so.

The spike was extended to 1.5 days and then I estimated the implementation of the HvH game for 3.5 days. This morning I threw everything away and started again. I needed to present it this afternoon. Clearly I’m not on track at all!

I’ve been wondering what I could have done differently to learn the framework more quickly and to make faster progress.

Maybe I should have taken a few days and done some tutorials before starting the first spike to create a button. And then maybe I should have done a bit bigger spike - of an actual basic Tic Tac Toe game - before starting to integrate the code into my codebase. I kind of ended up doing that anyway but I wasted a lot of time trying to fit my code into existing interfaces. I think it would have been beneficial to write a basic TTT once so I know what elements I needed for it, throw that code away and then start on the real integration with my existing codebase.

## Evening pairing

When my IPM was just finishing, Felipe came in and Jim asked him to pair with me. So we threw away my code and started again. Déjà vu!

Felipe explained to me how the dependencies can work and we started implementing the board view again. Very similar to how I had done it before, except that Felipe said the board view should be immutable.

Also he suggested that the View should not talk to the Game directly, which is how I had done it before, but that there should be a middleman which the View can pass the position on to, once a button was clicked. Then the Game can ask the middleman if there is any new information about a player having chosen a position. And that looked familiar to me. That's similar to how my Game is currently getting the information about which position the player has chosen. By doing it that way, the Game can depend on the middleman and the View also depends on the middleman, so we don’t need any circular dependencies. One problem solved. I can’t wait to solve all the other problems that are no doubt upcoming.

