---
title: Two in one confusion - clientor? mentent?
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2.5
category: apprenticeship
---

When I was cycling home after my IPM last night, I thought about the challenge that the two-in-one personality of my mentors brings with it. What I mean is that my mentors are supposed to also act as my clients.

<!--break-->

So, for example, during my IPM, I think I’m supposed to think of my mentor as my client when I present my code. Or when I feel that I might not finish a story in time, I need to manage my clients’ expectations and let them know early.

Except that sometimes during the IPM, my client shows me how to write certain bits of code. Or gives me recommendations on how to implement a feature. Or helps me with my git history. Which is of course great and wouldn’t be practical in any other way. I mean, we can’t really do two IPMs, one where Jim and Felipe pretend they’re a client and one where they’re themselves.

I understand why they have this double role. It's so that we can learn how 8th Lighters are supposed to communicate with clients. I guess they don't want us to practise on any real clients in case we scare them away... Fair enough! But it still feels a bit weird.

So, while I was cycling home, I was asking myself: why does it feel weird? Why does it confuse me?

Maybe because I’m sometimes not sure if I’m talking to mentor-Felipe or client-Felipe. I mean, when I ask him for help or what I should focus on next, then I always think of him as mentor-Felipe. 

But last night he said that it was good that I told him as my client that I had some spare time and asked him what to focus on next. I’m glad that he was happy about it but it was a coincidence really! I thought of him as my mentor when I asked him. I just thought about how I can learn the most important things as quickly as I can.
 
During the IPM, I can never be serious when I say something to him as my client. It just feels silly!

I’ve worked with clients before, both internal and external to the company I worked at. In my old job in Marketing I had lots of internal clients, who I needed to keep updated on progress, present work to or tell that no, they couldn’t have this new set of banner ads by tomorrow. Similar in another job working as a market researcher for an agency; I took briefs from clients, prioritised the work, did the research, gave long presentations about what I’d found out and so on.

But I feel the relationship with all those clients was very different from my relationship with Felipe and Jim. I mean, I tell Felipe and Jim what I struggle with, they help me understand certain things, they give me stories so that I can improve certain skills, I like going for beers with them… And with real clients in the past, I wouldn't have openly said that I have no idea how to go about creating a social media strategy for example. Because I'd wanted to instil trust in them that I can do the work they expect me to do. Instead I asked my colleagues for help, I read up on it, I looked at examples and then I delivered. They don’t care how I got to the result, as long as there was a result.

Now that I’ve written this blogpost and thought more about it, I think what is confusing me is that I don’t feel like I’m actually practising how to deal with clients the 8th Light way if I’m dealing with Jim or Felipe. I think in reality, I can only learn and understand it if I see how the craftsmen deal with real clients. It would be genuinely interesting to sit in on a client IPM or a briefing meeting or something like that. That's how I feel I would really learn about client communication. 

I've heard some craftsmen say that they wanted to bring apprentices into client meetings but I'm not sure if this was just in relation to the pairing tour at the end of the apprenticeship or if they meant earlier in the apprenticeship. I think it would be awesome if we got the opportunity to do that. But I also understand it might not be practical.