---
title: Elixir pattern matching
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2
category: apprenticeship
---

Pattern matching seems to be something that functional programming enthusiasts often talk about.
<!--break-->

I’ve always wondered what it is and tried to read up on it before but didn’t really understand how it could be useful and why people were getting excited about it.

In my quest to learn Elixir I’m reading “Programming Elixir” at the moment and when I read the chapter about how you use pattern matching instead of an if/else statement in a function, I finally understood what people meant! I’ll show an example in this post.

But firstly I’ll try to briefly explain how a basic pattern match works. You use an equals sign to compare two patterns like this.

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
[a, b, c] = [1, 2, 3]

</code></pre>

So, if I put that into iex, the interactive elixir shell, you can then check what `a`, `b` and `c` are matched to:

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
iex(1)> [a, b, c] = [1, 2, 3]
[1, 2, 3]
iex(2)> a
1
iex(3)> b
2
iex(4)> c
3

</code></pre>

Because `a`, `b` and `c` are variables that haven’t been used before, Elixir thinks that they must correspond to 1, 2 and 3 respectively.

So if we now type `a`, it returns 1. `b` returns 2 and `c` returns 3.
But if we try to match `a` with 4, we get an error because it remembered from before that `a` should match 1.

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
iex(8)> 4 = a
** (MatchError) no match of right hand side value: 1

</code></pre>

This becomes interesting when you use it inside a function.

To write a function, you first use the keyword “fn”, then you specify the arguments, then a little arrow “->” and then what the function should do. Oh, and don’t forget the “end” in the end. Just like Ruby!

Here’s an anonymous function that takes the arguments a and b and adds them

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
fn (a,b) -> a + b end

</code></pre>

The interesting thing is that you can specify more than one set of arguments with a corresponding code block. And the function determines which code block to use by pattern matching the arguments that are passed in. 

Here's an example of a function that has a special case for when the arguments are "something" (the underscore means it could be anything or even nothing) and 0. 

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
division = fn
  (_, 0) -> IO.puts "Can't divide by zero!"
  (a, b) -> IO.puts "#{a / b}"
end

</code></pre>

The function divides two numbers if the arguments are any numbers that are not 0 and it prints the result of this division. But if the divisor is 0, it prints an error message.

So if we call the function with the arguments of 3 and 0, it will print “Can’t divide by zero!”.

One of the exercises in the book that I’m reading is an implementation of FizzBuzz, using this technique. I’m used to seeing it with an if/else statement but seeing it with pattern matching really blew my mind! It’s so interesting!!