---
title: Database normalisation
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2
category: apprenticeship
---

Today we had a very interesting Zagaku about database normalisation.

<!--break-->

I know a little bit about SQL databases from my GA course. [Here’s a fond memory of the good old times](https://rabeameetscode.wordpress.com/2014/12/10/a-sense-of-accomplishment/).

But I don’t think I’d heard about database normalisation. Or maybe I did and I’d ignored it. Or forgotten it.

Daniel gave us some examples this morning.

Imagine we have a table with people and phone numbers.

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
Person

id | Name    | Telephone
------------------------ 
1  | Fred    | 124
2  | Wilma   | 123
3  | Barney  | 234
4  | Pebbles | 980

</code></pre>

Now what happens if someone has a second phone number? For example a home phone number and a mobile number?

My instinct was to just add a third column to the table and put the second number there. `rake db:migrate` - done! Something like this:

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
Person

id | Name    | Telephone | Telephone 2
--------------------------------------- 
1  | Fred    | 124       | 345
2  | Wilma   | 123       | 
3  | Barney  | 234       |
4  | Pebbles | 980       | 567

</code></pre>

But Daniel pointed out that this is not the best way of doing it. Firstly, each field in a database should have a value. Wilma and Barney only have one phone number, so we'd have to leave those fields empty, which is a waste of space. It doesn't look so bad in this small example but if we had thousands of entries in the database and only a few of them had a second phone number, the waste of space would become even more apparent. And what if someone had more than two phone numbers? Then we'd have to add even more columns and create more empty space.

So instead, we should have a second table, just for phone numbers, with a foreign key that relates to the Person table. I'm using the id as the foreign key.

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
Telephone

person_id | Telephone
----------------------
1         | 124
1         | 345
2         | 123
3         | 234
4         | 980
4         | 567

</code></pre>

That way you can associate the phone numbers to the correct person and are not wasting any space. And people can have as many phone numbers as they want and we can save them in the databse.

Daniel gave us another example of a bad database design:

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
Employees

Company                        | Name    | Head Office
-------------------------------------------------------
Slate Rock & Gravel Company    | Fred    | Bedrock
Slate Rock & Gravel Company    | Betty   | Bedrock 
Springfield Nuclear Power Plant| Homer   | Springfield
Springfield Nuclear Power Plant| Lenny   | Springfield

</code></pre>

The problem with this table is duplication. The companies' head offices will always be in the same place. So it doesn't make sense to repeat it for each employee entry.

It would be better to have a separate table just for the company name and head office.

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
Head office location

Company                        | Head Office
---------------------------------------------
Slate Rock & Gravel Company    | Bedrock
Springfield Nuclear Power Plant| Springfield

</code></pre>

And in this case the company name would be the foreign key that enables us to look up where the head office is. The advantage is that if the head office changed for one of the companies, we just need to update it in one place and not for every employee. Or if an employee changed their employer, we only need to update the company name and not the head office as well.
