---
title: Java makes me a modern girl
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2
category: apprenticeship
---

Uffff, this minimax business is hard. In theory * *I think* * I understand how the algorithm is supposed to work but I don’t really know how to implement it. I’ve been trying to find some code examples online but they're not really helping.

<!--break-->

The tests aren’t really much use in developing the algorithm either. I’ve written a few tests for different game states, expecting the computer player to return a specific position. It’s quite black boxy in that way, but I don’t really know if there are any smaller tests that would help me with the algorithm.

So yeah, I feel like I’m not really getting anywhere at the moment which is a bit annoying.

Even more annoying is that I’m out all week next week and the week after because I’ve been summoned for jury service. Seriously? Now?? I don’t have time for that! I secretly hope that by some stroke of luck, when I show up in court on Monday, they will say that it was all a mistake and they don’t need me after all. At least I could come to the office and get some help from my colleagues.

Well, I doubt that this will happen, especially now that I’ve jinxed it and wrote about it in my blog. At the moment my plan is to work on my stories before and after this court business (or possibly even during, I was told that there’s a lot of waiting around between cases). So hopefully I can make progress and it won’t delay my apprenticeship. I’m really not happy about it. I should have never registered for the electoral roll in the first place.

On a more positive note: I recently read Carrie Brownstein’s book (called "Hunger makes me a modern girl”) in which she talks about her teenage years and her time in the band Sleater Kinney. The book really impressed me and I’ve started to develop a small obsession with Carrie. I was at a gig last night and had to think about that book again and wondered: how can I be as cool as Carrie? But without actually being in a band because obviously I’m not.

So, after two large glasses of wine I had the idea to give this blog a title based on the book title: "Java makes me a modern girl". Has a great ring to it, doesn’t it?

I’ll work on a re-brand this weekend (you can take the girl out of marketing but you can’t take marketing out of the girl!).

And I’ll also fix the bug where a comment for one blog post suddenly shows up on all other posts as well. I was so happy to finally get my first comment (thanks Maël!) and then I noticed the bug. Whoops!

-- 

Little follow up from yesterday’s post: I spoke to Christoph about it and he said I can just instantiate a new board and use that for all the methods. Of course! Somehow that hadn’t even crossed my mind! He said another and potentially easier option would be to use the real board, place a mark, evaluate the game state and then remove the mark again. I’m not really convinced that it is easier though. Seems a bit confusing to remove the mark. At what stage do you do it?

So for now I’m going down the route of splitting the methods as I described in my blog post yesterday. I guess I can always refactor if Felipe thinks this is outrageous...