---
title: Learning about consulting
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2.5
category: apprenticeship
---

This morning Enrique ran his second Zagaku session related to consulting. Yesterday he introduced us to the 10 Laws of Trust and today he talked about the 4 Laws of Consulting.

<!--break-->

That might sound like a awful lot of laws and laws sound like they’re dry and no fun. But with these laws it's quite the opposite! I found these two sessions extremely interesting and I feel like I learnt a lot. There were a number of eye opening moments and surprises for me when learning about these laws.

I’m not going to regurgitate all of these 14 laws now but I thought I’d highlight some aspects that surprised me.

For example Enrique emphasised that consultants should never take credit for their own achievements. Instead they should always give all the credit to the client, no matter how much or how little the client actually contributed to the success. Instinctively I would have never guessed that.

In my previous jobs it was always important to make the company look good, to make your team look good and to make yourself look good. But to go into an organisation, work hard to deliver a good outcome for the client and then not take the credit for it?

It makes sense now that Enrique explained it. If management decides to hire consultants, that means that they basically have to admit failure. They have to admit that they can’t fix a problem themselves. Then, if the consultants come in, solve the problem and claim all the credit, management is going to feel even worse for not being able to fix it themselves. But if the consultants give all the credit to the client, the client will get a much better experience overall and is more likely to work with the consulting company again.

Another interesting point that Enrique made, which ties into this concept, is that consulting companies are often hired as an alibi. To show that management is willing to solve an existing problem. And if the consulting company can’t fix the problem either, then the client can at least point out that even the specialist consulting company couldn’t help. So they feel better about themselves. However, if the consulting company manages to help and gives the credit to the clients, that also means that the clients feel better. So either way - the client will be happy. And that’s what we want! As a consultant we should always think about the long-term impact, never just the short-term.

One of the laws of consulting is that consultants are paid by the hour. I wondered how this could be a law? But the implications are that if a consultant is hired for a project, they shouldn’t just go and work on that project. But they should look further and help the organisation with the root cause of the problem. So it’s not so important that the project gets done but it’s more important that the consultant actually makes a difference to the organisation. Hence the payment by hour rather than for a completed project.

I’d never considered it that way before! But again, it makes sense. If a consulting company is hired, that means that there must be more problems than just implementing new features. Otherwise they could have hired a couple of contract developers.

Enrique also emphasised that any problem a client company might have always goes back to a people problem. Therefore it’s important to look at an organisation and try to understand as much as possible about the structure and the dynamics. And not only look at the code in front of you. To make a long-term impact it’s important to try to tackle those people issues over and above writing code.

All of those laws are taken from the book “The secrets of consulting” by Gerry Weinberg. I’ll definitely add that book to my reading list because I have a feeling that it will contain a lot more eureka moments for me.