---
title: HTTP Server reloaded 
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2
category: apprenticeship
---

Wow, I haven’t blogged for ages! In fact, I was allowed a hiatus during the two weeks that I worked on the infamous HTTP server project, so that I could fully focus on coding. And then I went away for a short server holiday in Slovenia (I can highly recommend it!).

<!--break-->

The HTTP Server is a coding challenge that every 8th Light apprentice receives (as far as I know). There's an 8th Light Fitness test suite which makes requests and expects appropriate HTTP responses. 

Most apprentices are quite apprehensive about this challenge. It's meant to be difficult and really work intensive. Georgina and Sarah, who were the last two apprentices to go through the challenge before me, didn’t seem to find it too bad though and Georgina even said it was the best project of her apprenticeship.

So I decided to stay calm and not be too nervous about it. What was the worst that could happen? That I’d have to write it again? That my apprenticeship would get extended? Surely that wouldn’t… Oh, hang on… It happened. Normally when I think about these worst case scenarios, they never actually happen. Well, not this time.

My server code works as it should but my code design was so bad that I was asked to write it again from scratch. After I finish that I’ll have to work on an additional project to practise my design. And my challenges were pushed out by a month. 

I was quite down when Felipe first told me this. But to be fair - I don’t really have much experience when it comes to application design. I don’t really know many design patterns, all I can write is a Tic Tac Toe application with a Board class, a Player, a Game and so on and so on. I always used pretty much the same design. I haven’t written any other applications with more than 10 classes really. So I totally understand that I need to practise this more.

Funnily enough I didn't really feel like I was ready to do the challenges but I told myself that surely that must be the famous imposter syndrome that everybody talks about, right? So get over it and go for it. It would have only been another couple of weeks for my pairing tour and then I would have started the famous secret challenges. Well, turns out that it wasn't imposter syndrom but I really don’t know what I’m doing (at least when it comes to design).

Anyway, hopefully during the next few weeks I will be able to get my head around good application design, so that when I eventually get my challenges, I will actually pass them. I mean… what’s the worst that can happen? Oh god… I should really stop asking this question.

## Onwards and upwards

So today I spent setting up the Java project again. The nice thing is that I already have a lot of things figured out. For example how to create a jar and to use the ExecutorService for threading. Or that the response body needs to return bytes, not a string. Or how to test all these exceptions. So I should be able to make much faster progress the second time around.

So far I’ve managed to parse the command line arguments, set up the threads and receive a request. For some reason I can’t send a response currently which is a bit odd, but I thought I’d take a break to write this blog post. So hopefully I figure out what the issue is afterwards.

In terms of design, I’ll try to break down the code by routes and have a controller for each route which will handle the necessary activity to send back the correct response. That should make it easier to add a new route and corresponding controller. Previously I did feel that my code was a bit messy and it was hard to add new logic for responses but I just couldn’t think of how to resolve these issues. I also felt the time pressure and wanted to make sure that I definitely managed to get all the tests to pass.

This time Felipe said that it’s more important that the code adheres to the SRP and OCP than getting every single story done. That gives me a bit more breathing room. Of course I still want to get everything done but I won’t work on it the whole weekend if I can’t.

Right, and now I’ll try sending a response again.