---
title: I have a date!
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 1
category: apprenticeship
---

During today’s IPM we planned the rest of my apprenticeship and estimated when I would graduate! It's v nery exciting to have a date now.

<!--break-->

I had a date before but it was 20th May and I never thought that this would actually be realistic, so I felt like I didn’t really have a date at all. 

But today Jim listed all the topics that I still needed to learn and estimated how long each would take for me to get up to speed with. And then he came up with a date in mid to end July (aiming for mid July!) for my graduation.

## Name that feeling

During my IPM Jim and Felipe always ask me for my favourite bit of code that I wrote during the last iteration. This time I showed them how I got rid of a code smell. Then Jim asked me which SOLID principle violation I had fixed with that. And I wasn’t really sure. The previous code had just felt really wrong but I hadn’t thought about it any further. I guess it’s a start that at least I had a bad feeling about it. A few months ago I would have just been happy that it worked!

But Jim said that from now on, every time I get a weird feeling about code, I should think about it and understand which principle or rule I’m violating. That I should give it a name. Makes sense! I guess that will firstly make me even more aware of the principles that we’re learning here and secondly it will help me explain myself to others better.

So from now on, I’ll start thinking about code smells more in terms of the principles. This might also help me avoid having to write any more blog posts or prepare Zagakus based on my mistakes!