---
title: Just another Friday
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 1.5
category: apprenticeship
---

Today I worked more on my contacts management application. I feel like I’m making faster progress now. Somehow it seems a bit easier because I have written some code which gives me a structure that I can follow.

<!--break-->

I also raised a PR for my blog post on the 8th Light blog. I almost felt a bit nervous about it when I saw how many comments the other open PRs had. I wondered what people will think about my post! But so far I’ve only had a positive comment from Kyle. So maybe no one else will say anything and it will just get merged.

It’s strange… I really thought I’d get a lot more feedback on my post. I’m used to getting feedback and having to ‘refactor’ my more in-depth and technical blog posts. And I'm also used to giving feedback from my previous life in digital marketing. I don’t think I would have let anyone add copy to our website or publish a blog post without at least bringing the text in line with our corporate writing style guide. And getting it approved by Legal and Compliance of course. At the minimum! 

Well, I guess 8th Light isn’t as corporate as the places that I have worked for in the past. They don’t force corporates styles on everything. They don't have regulators breathing down their necks either... And I guess ultimately my name is still associated with the blog post and it’s not really written in the name of the company.

Anyway, let's see when it gets published.

The most exciting event of the day was that Georgina got her challenges! She was nervous all day which is completely understandable and then finally, in the afternoon, she received the task (or tasks?). The thing that no one knows what it is.

She’s going to sit in the corner with her back to the wall for the next two weeks now and work on this secret task. No one is allowed to see her screen. It’s so mysterious! She wrote a [really good blog post](http://gemcfadyen.github.io/georginam.com/apprenticeship/2016/04/15/apprenticeship-day-129.html) about how she felt today as well.

I’m gutted that I won’t be in the office for her final presentation when she hands in her challenges. That’s also the day when the decision is made if she can become a craftsperson or not. Such a big day! But I’ll be at my friend’s birthday in Hamburg. Which is of course also a big day.

Well, if all goes well it will be my turn to do the challenges in July!