---
title: Testing Phoenix and my patience
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2
category: apprenticeship
---

When I first started using Phoenix last week, I thought “great! This is like Rails!”. Seeing that I know Rails a little bit, I thought it would be relatively straight forward for me to use Phoenix.

<!--break-->

I did a little spike to get my app working as required for the human versus computer game. And that was indeed relatively straight forward.

Except that I couldn’t figure out for the life of me how to test it. The problem was that I was using the session to store the game state, a list of either empty of filled cells. I was able to test simple get requests to different URLs but I needed to set session parameters in my tests to make sure that my app would do the correct thing for different game states.

This wasn’t too hard when I used Rack Test for my Sinatra app, but for my Phoenix app, I just couldn’t get it to work. I spent hours googling around, asked for help, tried to follow different examples. I was at least getting different error messages, depending on what I was trying but it just wouldn’t work.

So I decided to rewrite my controller logic with get requests only. Because that’s the only thing that I know how to test.

Now the game state is stored in the URL rather than in the session. And the cells are empty, have X or O depending on what the URL looks like.

This is an empty board for example

`http://localhost:1234/game/123456789`

This is a game state where O is the winner:

`http://localhost:1234/game/OXXOXXOO9`

But doing it this way has various downsides. Firstly, the game state will be updated if you change the URL. When storing the game state in the session, the user could only update the game state by actually playing the game, not by changing the URL.

In my code I have to do a lot of converting from string to list and from list to string because the params that my application gets from the URL are always strings. It works but it would be so much easier if I could just store a list in the session, how I had initially wanted to code it.

I’m now using GET requests to change the game state. That is something that should normally be done through a POST request. GET requests should be used when data from the server is queried and displayed. They shouldn’t have side effects like changing something. However, I’m doing that here - I’m changing the game state. However a POST request submits data and creates a new resource or updates an existing resource.

But I’d rather accept those downsides than use untested code. I wouldn’t be comfortable showing this in my IPM.

I wonder what it’s like when you’re on a client project and can’t figure something out. I guess at least I'd work with a pair who will hopefully be able to help.

## Heroku

Jim asked me in my last IPM if I’d done any deployment. I’ve only deployed my Rails and Sinatra apps to Heroku before during my GA time. Oh, and my Meteor website to the Meteor free hosting service! 

As my IPM was postponed till tomorrow, I thought I’d give it a go with my Phoenix app and Heroku this afternoon. There’s a detailed tutorial on the Phoenix website which I followed. But again… errors! Heroku rejected my deployment because it can’t find a secret config file which the tutorial says is not used by Heroku. Why are things never easy?!

I found some blogs online which say that I should remove the secret config file from my gitignore file and push it to Heroku. I tried that… doesn’t work either.

I guess these last two days haven’t been very successful. I just hope that this streak doesn’t carry over to next week when I’ll have to write my HTTP server!