---
title: Optimising my computer player more 
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 1.5
category: apprenticeship
---

Mateu gave me some advice on speeding up my computer player last night. He had the same story in his iteration when he was an apprentice and took it really far - he even went to the lengths of meta-programming to make his code faster.

<!--break-->

Well, I’m not that extreme (also I don't know how to do it...)

However, Mateu showed me a really interesting way to save some time on method calls that I hadn’t thought of myself.

When looking at the report that the profiler generated, a lot of the method calls on the Board class take up most of the time. As my board is immutable, some of the calculations that the methods do only need to be done once and the result of the calculation can be saved in a variable. The next time the method is called, the variable can return the data and the method doesn’t have to do the calculations all over again. This only works with immutable state though. If the Board object changed, then this technique would result in all sorts of bugs because the variables would return outdated state.

Here’s the example of the method that adds rows, columns and diagonals into an array to return all lines of the current game state.

## Before

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
def lines
  [rows, columns, diagonals].flatten(1)
end

</code></pre>

## After

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
  def lines
    @lines ||= [rows, columns, diagonals].flatten(1)
  end
  
</code></pre>

This code is short for “if @lines is nil, then do the calculation and assign the result to the variable. If it is not nil, then return @lines”.

## Long form
 
<pre><code class="language-ruby"> 
  def lines
    if @lines == nil
      @lines = [rows, columns, diagonals].flatten(1)
    else
      @lines
    end
  end
  
</code></pre>

I just thought I'd add the long form for clarity because it helped me understand the short form better.

We updated a couple of methods like this and it did shave almost another second off the first computer move. So now I’m down to approximately 2.8 seconds. Still not near the desired 1 second mark but getting closer!