---
title: A bit of C#
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 1
category: apprenticeship
---

I just finished pairing with Ced on his C# project, a contact management system. We tried to figure out how to persist data by writing it to a file. 

<!--break-->

We did a little spike to test it out in a separate project, with the intention to then test drive it for the real project. 

It took us a while to get it working in the spike though. It seemed like it was writing the object to the file correctly but we couldn't get it to read the data from the file again. In the end it turned out that the issue was that a field variable was private and the serialization module needs public ones or fields with an auto-property.

The auto-property is a really interesting syntax. You can just add `{get; set}` after a field declaration and then it automatically has getter and setter methods. 

But what really struck me was the hoops that Ced has to go through with using C#. Not only is it a new language for him (well, not so new anymore but still...) but he's also running a virtual machine with Windows to be able to use Visual Studio as an IDE. To access his files on both the virtual machine and on his actual laptop, he has saved them in Google Drive. Strangely the Mac keyboard that he is using isn't quite understood by Windows. Some keys are in different places it seems (it might be that it's set to British but the keyboard layout is American?). 

I found it quite confusing to not only be working with a programming language that I don't know but also with Windows! But, as with everything, I guess you get used to it over time...