---
title: The story of my minimax conquest
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2
category: apprenticeship
---

On Friday afternoon, just before going to the pub, Felipe took a look at my (still non-functioning) minimax code and suggested that I should use an immutable board. Previously I just took a copy of the actual board and then used it to play out the options. I think I might have forgotten to reset the moves though and basically, it only plaid once into all empty positions and then it finished.

<!--break-->

So, on Saturday I was keen to try out the immutable board option. Three hours later, no joy.

Priya is also working on the same problem and we are basically obsessed with it, so we ended up talking about it on Saturday at our Christmas party before we were drunk. And then again when we were drunk. We agreed that if either of us get it working, we’ll go to the pub straight away, no matter what time of day it is.

That invigorated me and gave me new hope that I would find the solution. Priya is very positive and kept telling me to imagine how great it must feel if we solved it! But I don’t know… I couldn’t imagine that I would ever solve it. And normally I’m the most optimistic person in the room!

Anyway, due to the Christmas party aftereffects and a three hour hike on Sunday, I just didn’t have any energy to look at my code again. So I came in a bit earlier today and went through it once more. For what felt like the one hundredth time.

I realised that this time, when I was resetting the score, I was always setting it to a positive high number. But actually, depending on who the current player is, it needs to be either a negative or a positive number. So I updated that, ran the test… and they passed! Only two tests didn’t pass but all the other ones that normally always failed, suddenly passed!

Could it be that I got it working? No way! By that time Christoph had come into the office and I wondered if I should tell him that it’s working or if that would jinx it. So I tentatively spoke it out loud: “I think I got it working?!” I played it to test it manually and yes, I wasn’t able to win against the computer. For the first time!

Somehow I still didn’t quite trust it. So I looked at the two failing tests. One failing test was actually testing a game end state. Whoops! Slight oversight on my side. Obviously if the game is already over, the minimax can’t do much. So I deleted that one. The other test is a weird one. The game state has four open positions still, and in my opinion the best moves for the computer player would be 3 and 5 but somehow it returns 8. It’s an empty position as well, so I’m not sure if maybe I’m wrong and the minimax is right? The computer cannot win anymore anyway, no matter where it places its mark, so I guess 8 is as good as 3 or 5?

<pre><code class="language-java">
    @Test
    public void placesAMarkToWinInTheNextRoundII() {
        board = new Board(new Mark[] {X,     O, X,
                                      EMPTY, O, EMPTY,
                                      EMPTY, X, EMPTY});
        assertTrue((3  == unbeatableComputerPlayer.getPosition(board)) ||
                5 == unbeatableComputerPlayer.getPosition(board));
    }

// returns 8
</code></pre>

When I had my IPM today I showed Jim. He looked at the test and said that I might have a bug in the code, which leads to this test failure. And that my algorithm wasn’t aggressive enough. So I’ll try to refactor it and take the depth into account when scoring, which I’m not doing at the moment. My code needs to be cleaned up quite a lot anyway. Hopefully, once I’ve structured it a bit better, it will become clearer where the potential bug is coming from.

But at least it looks like finally I'm on the right way! I'm almost tempted to go back to my Ruby Tic Tac Toe that I wrote for my application and implement the algorithm there as well. But maybe I'm getting a bit over-confident now. I'll get the Java version working properly and then I'll take it from there.


