---
title: A guest in your codebase
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 1.5
category: apprenticeship
---

Today I put some finishing touches on my contacts management system and submitted the code to my review board. It consists of 5 craftsmen (including my mentors), who will give me feedback on my code on Friday.

<!--break-->

As a lunch treat I went to the talk at Pivotal Labs. I’ve been to their lunch events a few times before and always really enjoyed them. I should really go more often if the time allows.

The talk today was by Nadia Odunayo and she talked about code hospitality. I’m pretty sure it’s a made up term but the gist was that you should treat a developer who is new to a code base, like a guest to your house. 

If you had a friend staying with you, you’d probably clean your flat (my parents are coming at the weekend and I still have some cleaning to do…), show your friend around the area, give them a map and instructions on how to get to the next tube station, things like that.

And basically you should do the same with a new developer, no matter which level they’re at. You should have a good Readme which explains how to run the code and how to find your way around the codebase, you should tidy up the code (probably best to always have clean code anyway) and you should sit with them and show them around.

One point that I thought was particularly interesting was about different viewpoints. Nadia asked us to imagine a user story that was about “finding your way to the Tower of London”. And then she showed two completely different photos of the Tower. One areal shot and one photo of just the entrance door. 

I thought that was a really good analogy of how different developers might understand a problem in a completey different way. They might be talking about the same user story or the same problem but they're thinking about it in a different way - without being aware of those differences. 

To resolve this, Nadia suggested that we should always assume that both programmers are lost - not that one is right and the other is wrong. And then draw out the problem in a diagram on paper and discuss it until both really understand each other’s view points.

It was a good talk! 

I’m going back to Pivotal Labs in a few hours for Codebar… Maybe I should have just hot desked from there this afternoon...