---
title: Purity
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 1
category: apprenticeship
---

Today Mateu gave a Zagaku on purity and impurity of methods and functions. He started off by explaining how to spot if a function is pure or impure.


<!--break-->

Pure functions have no side effects, no side causes and the output is always the same for a particular input. In functional programming we should strive to have as many pure functions as possible and push the impure bit as far away as possible from the core logic.

An example for an impure function is a function that reads user input and returns the input.
In Elixir it would look like this:

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
  def get_name do
    IO.gets("Please enter your name")
  end

</code></pre>

The function has no parameters, so there is no input. And the output could be whatever the user types in. So we can't predict the output.

To make this function pure, we can instead pass in the user’s name as a parameter and push the impure bit, the `IO.gets/1` to the outside of our application.


<pre><code class="language-ruby">
  def get_name(name) do
    name
  end
  
</code></pre>

Another example of an impure function would be a function that returns a random number or that returns the current date. Again we can’t predict what the output of a function like that will be.

Mateu also gave us an example of an impure function where the input and output are always the same. It was along the lines of this:

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
  def age(birth_year) do
    get_current_year
    |> subtract(birth_year)
    |> IO.puts
  end

</code></pre>

In this function the output is predictable. In fact, it's always the same, no matter what value of the parameter birth year is. It's nothing! However, this function has a side effect, which is that it is printing something to the console.

To make this function pure, we could for example move the `IO.puts` into another function and instead just return the age from this function.

Mateu also pointed out that we often make our methods pure in OO, when we're using test doubles. We'll use a double to replace the unpredictable thing that causes side effects so that we can control it. And by doing that, we're making the function pure. 

The advantages of pure functions besides that they're easy to test is that they are also easier to maintain and are more reusable. They're also easier to reason about and less likely to hide bugs.
