---
title: Controlling the controllers 
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 5
category: apprenticeship
---

Last night I paired with Felipe to refactor my HTTP Server code.

<!--break-->

One of my main concerns when writing the code was that it would adhere to the Open/Closed Principle. And it did! When I recently added a new response for the `/coffee` route, it was pretty easy to do. I only had to update the `Main` class to configure the `Router` with a new route and corresponding controller, I had to add the new controller class and the corresponding tests and I had to add a new entry to the `StatusLine` Enum. Not too bad, I thought. [Here's the PR](https://github.com/RabeaGleissner/second-http-server/pull/9/files).

But Felipe had said to me before, that my code could be more straight forward. And that all my response creator classes maybe weren’t needed.

But firstly, let me explain how I had structured my code.

My server code roughly works like this:
It receives a request string through the socket connection. It parses the request and stores it in a `Request` object. Then the router is asked to return the correct controller, based on the request URI.

The router is initially configured in `Main`, so it knows which  controller belongs to which URI.

When my application has found the correct controller, it then asks the controller to return the correct response based on the request method. And then it sends the response back through the socket.

Sounds relatively straight forward. But I guess I made each controller more complicated then it needed to be.


## Before

Below is the code for the `MethodOptionsController`, which is probably the most complex one I’d had.

To understand my reasoning for structuring it like this, you need to understand that this controller needs to respond to an OPTIONS request. The HTTP response to an OPTIONS request includes all valid HTTP methods for that route. So if allowed methods are GET, POST and PUT, the OPTIONS response will includes GET, POST and PUT.

And I thought the best way of doing this in a dynamic way is to create a HashMap with all allowed methods as keys and all corresponding responses as values. So then I could iterate over all keys of that Map and thus know which methods are implemented. 

As you can see below, I'm calling the `registerResponse()` method in the constructor, so once the `MethodOptionsController` is instantiated, it is called. 

<pre><code class="language-java">
public class MethodOptionsController implements Controller {
    private Map<HttpVerb, ResponseCreator> responsesForMethods = new HashMap<>();
    private final ContentStorage contentStorage;

    public MethodOptionsController(ContentStorage contentStorage) {
        this.contentStorage = contentStorage;
        this.responsesForMethods = registerResponses();
    }

    @Override
    public HttpResponse getResponse(HttpRequest request) {
        return responsesForMethods.getOrDefault(
                request.requestLine().method(),
                new NoMethodResponseCreator())
                .create(request.body().getBytes());
    }

    private Map<HttpVerb, ResponseCreator> registerResponses() {
        responsesForMethods.put(GET, new GetResponseCreator(OK));
        responsesForMethods.put(POST, new PostResponseCreator(OK, contentStorage));
        responsesForMethods.put(HEAD, new HeadResponseCreator(OK));
        responsesForMethods.put(OPTIONS, new OptionsResponseCreator(OK, new OptionsResponseHeader(responsesForMethods)));
        return responsesForMethods;
    }

}

</code></pre>

The instantiation happens in the Main class, before the server is even started. And while I was writing the code, I ran into the problem that all the responses were being created at that time as well - except that they hadn't even received a request, so it became problematic to create a response which needed to save the request body for example. 

So I decided to wrap each response in a response creator. One for each request method. And when the application was finally ready to ask the controller for a response and would call the `getResponse(HttpRequest request)` method, it could then send the request body into the create method and the response could be created based on that.

This is what the `PostResponseCreator` looked like. It receives the request body in its `create` method, stores the body in the content storage and returns an HttpResponse with a given status line.

<pre><code class="language-java">
public class PostResponseCreator implements ResponseCreator {

    private final StatusLine statusLine;
    private final ContentStorage contentStorage;

    public PostResponseCreator(StatusLine statusLine, ContentStorage contentStorage) {
        this.statusLine = statusLine;
        this.contentStorage = contentStorage;
    }

    @Override
    public HttpResponse create(byte[] body) {
        contentStorage.store(body);
        return new HttpResponse(statusLine);
    }
}

</code></pre>

When I wrote it, I felt that it was ok. One of the advantages that I saw was that I was able to standardise the responses. I could make sure that every time I handled a POST request, I saved the request body. Or that a response for OPTIONS would always include the corresponding response header.

And by using the Map, I was able to make sure that OPTIONS would return the correct methods that were allowed for this URI. Although I have to admit, that this only worked when I registered the options response last and I had to manually add OPTIONS to the list of verbs in the response header. Because by the time the HashMap was passed into the OptionsResponseHeader, it hadn't registered the OptionsResponse yet. So maybe my idea wasn't quite as bullet proof as I thought it was.

## After

Felipe gave me a few things to think about. 

Firstly he said that the way you had to register the response creators in a Map wasn't ideal. That Java had better ways of dealing with a polymorphic dispatch of actions than a Map. 

OK, fair enough. But what about the OPTIONS response headers? How would they know which methods were allowed for the particular URI? Felipe suggested to hard-code that for now. It would be possible to do some Java Reflections trickery later but that could become complicated.

Hard-code it?? But what about making my application as flexible as possible? 

But he was right. Changing the way the controllers decided which response to return has now made my code a lot simpler. I need fewer lines of code, fewer classes and the code is easier to read. And hard-coding the allowed methods seems like a small trade-off for a significant simplification of my code.

Another thing that Felipe gave me to consider was that maybe the standardisation of responses, that I was quite happy with, wasn't such a good thing. The cob spec test suite doesn't always require to have the request body sent back after a POST and GET request. In fact, I think it's only for one test. So why implement it for every POST request?

I guess I thought that the cob spec tests were examples of how my code should generally work. So if the test suite expects to have the response body returned for a POST and GET request combination to one route, it would be the same for every route. But of course, that's a conclusion that I drew and it doesn't necessarily mean that it's correct.

So the way we refactored my controllers was to let all the individual controllers inherit from one main controller class.

The class has a default response method implemented for every valid HTTP request method: the 'method not allowed' response. Because we can assume, if a specific controller hasn't overwritten the method, the method probably isn't implemented and therefore not allowed.

Most importantly, the controller also has a dispatch method. And that method is called with the HTTP request, so it can decide which response to return and can do extra stuff like storing the request's body content.
 
<pre><code class="language-java">
public class Controller {

   private final HttpResponse methodNotAllowed = new HttpResponse(NOT_ALLOWED);
   
   public HttpResponse dispatch(HttpRequest httpRequest) {
      HttpVerb verb = httpRequest.requestLine().method();
        switch (verb) {
          case PUT: return doPut(httpRequest);
          case POST: return doPost(httpRequest);
          case HEAD: return doHead(httpRequest);
          case PATCH: return doPatch(httpRequest);
          case DELETE: return doDelete(httpRequest);
          case OPTIONS: return doOptions(httpRequest);
          case GET: return doGet(httpRequest);
          default: return new HttpResponse(NOT_ALLOWED);
       }
    }

   public HttpResponse doGet(HttpRequest request) {
      return methodNotAllowed;
   }

   public HttpResponse doPut(HttpRequest request) {
      return methodNotAllowed;
   }

   public HttpResponse doPost(HttpRequest request) {
      return methodNotAllowed;
   }

   public HttpResponse doDelete(HttpRequest request) {
      return methodNotAllowed;
   }

   public HttpResponse doOptions(HttpRequest request) {
      return methodNotAllowed;
   }

   public HttpResponse doPatch(HttpRequest request) {
      return methodNotAllowed;
   }

   public HttpResponse doHead(HttpRequest request) {
      return methodNotAllowed;
   }
}

</code></pre>


The `MethodOptionsController` now looks like this. I've implemented only those methods that it needs and it will inherit the other response methods from the `Controller` class which all return "not allowed".


<pre><code class="language-java">
public class MethodOptionsController extends Controller {

    @Override
    public HttpResponse doGet(HttpRequest request) {
        return okResponse();
    }

    @Override
    public HttpResponse doHead(HttpRequest request) {
        return okResponse();
    }

    @Override
    public HttpResponse doPost(HttpRequest request) {
        return okResponse();
    }

    @Override
    public HttpResponse doOptions(HttpRequest request) {
        return new HttpResponse(OK, new OptionsResponseHeader(GET, HEAD, POST, OPTIONS));
    }
}

</code></pre>

The allowed methods for the OPTIONS response are hard-code but that is a small price to pay for this simplification. I was able to delete all my response creator classes, which were at total of nine plus corresponding tests. So the PR for this refactoring resulted in a net reduction of my code by 211 lines!

In the `MethodOptionsController` code you can also see that it is not dependent on the `ContentStorage` class anymore because I'm not storing the body content for the post request. And the cob spec test is still satisfied. 

At the moment only two controllers need to be dependent on the `ContentStorage` and one of them is the `FormController`, which saves content, deletes content or returns stored content, depending on the request method. It looks like this:

<pre><code class="language-java">
public class FormController extends Controller {

    private final ContentStorage contentStorage;

    public FormController(ContentStorage contentStorage) {
        this.contentStorage = contentStorage;
    }

    @Override
    public HttpResponse doPost(HttpRequest request) {
        contentStorage.storeResponseBody(request.body());
        return okResponse();
    }

    @Override
    public HttpResponse doGet(HttpRequest request) {
        return new HttpResponse(OK, contentStorage.content());
    }

    @Override
    public HttpResponse doDelete(HttpRequest request) {
        contentStorage.deleteContent();
        return okResponse();
    }
}

</code></pre>

In addition to reducing the number of classes, I've reduced the dependencies for a lot of the controllers as well.

Overall my code is a lot simpler now and I think the trade offs of hard-coding the OPTIONS methods and not having the standardised responses for all controllers (if this was even necessary at all) are small.

