---
title: My thinking around implementing the Basic Auth response
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2
category: apprenticeship
---


Yesterday I decided to tackle implementing basic authentication and logging for my HTTP server. Out of the remaining tasks in Artisan, this one had the highest estimation, so I thought I better work on it as a priority.

<!--break-->

The cob spec test first makes an unauthorised GET request to the URI `/logs` and receives a 401 response. The `/logs` route needs to have basic auth. Next, the test makes requests to three different routes that I haven’t implemented yet: `/log`, `/these` and `/requests`. Then it makes an authorised request to the `/logs` route and expects to see a record of the three previous requests in the response body.

The first thought that I had was that I hadn’t implemented those three routes. Did I need to implement each with it’s own controller? But no, luckily I came to the conclusion that it didn’t matter if they received 404 responses, as long as I tracked somewhere that these routes were requested.

So firstly I focused on implementing a `Logger` class to keep track of all the incoming responses. But where did this responsibly lie? Does the Router do that? Not really. Or the controller? Hm.
Maybe the logger was just the logger, all alone and by itself. So I would have to instantiate it in Main and then pass it through the application until it arrived in the ServerWorker, where it could get the request line and start doing it’s logging.

Although I was a bit hesitant to  instantiate yet another thing in Main and then reach it through various classes. Maybe it could be combined with the ContentStorage class. Ultimately both do the same thing - saving some information for later and returning it when someone asks them for it.

But then I thought that it could be possible in future that the ContentStorage could do a bit more than just store Strings in memory. It could be the gateway to a database for example. And I don’t think the Logger would store its data in the same database table. Combining those two seems like an SPR violation.

To be sure, I used the SRP violation detection trick of thinking which department in a company would ask for changes to a class. Changes to the logging would possibly be requested by a systems admin team. And changes to the content storage are more likely to come from the website product manager. OK, definitely an SRP violation. Not a good idea to combine the Logger and Content Storage.

Instead I instantiated the Logger in Main and passed it into ServerWorker, where it does it’s logging. It actually just had to go through the HttpServer class until it arrived in the ServerWorker class, so not a big deal.

But that now meant that it logged every single request that the server received. From what Felipe said on Tuesday, I didn’t need to make my implementations so generic. Based on that comment I’d decided to stop considering the cob spec tests as examples for generic behaviour of my application. Instead I wanted try to make it just good enough for a test to pass. So I guess I really only needed to log requests to the routes that this test specified, which were `/log`, `/these`, `/requests`.

But then I might as well hard code the response and not do any logging at all. Which I’m not going to do because it's cheating. So it’s probably ok to log everything.

This is what the ServerWorker looks like now. The request comes in from the socket and the logger logs the request line straight away.

<pre><code class="language-java">
public class ServerWorker {
    // imagine field variables and constructor

    public void start() {
        HttpRequest request = socketReader.read();
        logger.log(request.requestLine());
        Controller controller = router.getController(request);
        HttpResponse httpResponse = controller.dispatch(request);
        socketWriter.write(httpResponse.asBytes());
    }
}

</code></pre>

The next question was how the HTTP response would know what has been logged. So I decided that I also needed to pass the logger into the LogsController in Main. And when the LogsController returns the GET response, it passes the logs into the HttpResponse as the argument for the body. 

<pre><code class="language-java">
public class LogsController extends Controller {

    private Logger logger;

    public LogsController(Logger logger) {
        super();
        this.logger = logger;
    }

    @Override
    public HttpResponse doGet(HttpRequest request) {
        return new HttpResponse(StatusLine.OK, logger.getLogs());
    }
}

</code></pre>

And the logging works!
