---
title: NP? No problem? Not quite… 
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2
category: apprenticeship
---

Yesterday I went to a meetup where a gentleman did a presentation on the Christofides algorithm. It’s an approximation algorithm for the travelling salesman problem.

<!--break-->

I thought it sounded interesting and that I would like to learn more about the problem and how people approach solving it. So I went along to the meetup. 

Unfortunately I didn’t understand the talk. I guess it wasn’t aimed at computer science newbies but more at people with a PhD in computer science. It was a very serious meetup. People were wearing suits! And I didn’t see a single stickered laptop or tech swag t-shirt. These weren't web developers or hackers, these people meant business!

But even though I still have no idea how the algorithm works, I learnt a few other things. Or shall we say at least I heard a few things for the first time that some people seemed to be nodding along to as if they were talking about the weather.

I learnt that the travelling salesman problem is an NP-complete problem. I’d never heard anything about “NP” before but it was mentioned quite a lot yesterday. N stands for non-deterministic and P stands for polynomial-time. What I gathered from the talk yesterday was that this means that the problem is really bloody hard to solve.

I had never heard of “polynomial time” before either but I figured that it’s something like a “reasonable amount of time”? I did some wikipedia reading on this but I still don’t really understand what it means. Something to do with how long computers take to run a programme in relation to what the programme is.

Wikipedia tells me that the "non-deterministic” bit relates to a non-deterministic Turing machine. Turing machine! Finally something I’ve heard before. Micah gave a Zagaku on it. And a non-deterministic version of it is a machine that can process rules which require it to perform more than one action for a given situation. There’s also a deterministic Turing machine which can only perform one action for a given situation. So it sounds like the non-deterministic version is a cleverer version of the standard one.

So what is an NP-complete problem? It seem like the characteristic of it is that there is no known solution to it which would take a reasonable amount of time. The time that is required to solve the problem using any known algorithm increases hugely as the size of the problem grows. But no one has figured out yet if it is possible to solve these problems quickly or not.

The way that computer scientists approach solving this kind of problem is by using an approximation algorithm. And the Christofides algorithm is one of those.

Approximation algorithms are used to find approximate solutions to optimisation problems. Like the travelling salesman problem (referred to as “TSP" by the people in the know last night) which describes the problem of finding the shortest distance between several cities that an imaginary salesman needs to visit before returning home. And we want to optimise the distance that this guy travels including coming back home.

Cool! At least now I understand a bit more what the meetup was about. Maybe I’ll try to look at the algorithm again in a few years...