---
title: "This rug really tied the room together"
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2
category: apprenticeship
---

It’s been in my backlog for weeks - and finally it has made it into my iteration. The Bowling Game kata!

<!--break-->

I’ve bowled loads of times. I mean, not on a regular basis but I’ve done it now and then. But before looking at this kata, I had no idea about how the scoring worked. 

So I’m not only learning how to test drive, refactor and type really fast in vim but I’m also learning for life! Next time I go bowling, I'll enlightened everyone over a White Russian as to how the scoring works.  Unless they already know (which would make it highly like that they’re either Americans or software developers).

This morning I spent thinking about which sequence I should do the kata in. I made notes so I have something to refer to. At the end I still found that I could have refactored more, so I’m changing the sequence a bit to extract some more methods earlier.

Once I’ve got that nailed down, I need to internalise the sequence and practise typing it out as fast as I can. I’m performing the kata on Friday, so have about 1.5 days to practise. With previous katas I found it was best to practise now and then during a break from a different task. So I’ll do that again this time. I just need to refine the sequence and then I’ll start working on my next story and from time to time do the kata again.

I’m actually quite glad that I need to perform it rather than do a screen recording. Previously I thought that screen recordings were easier, because I could do it over again if I made a mistake. And then hopefully get the perfect recording. But that usually lead me down a rabbit hole of trying it over and over again and just making more and more mistakes and never being happy with the recording.
At least with the live coding you have one shot and don’t have the chance to waste time by doing it over again.

One thing I also need to nail down is the music! I remembered the song “Let’s go bowling” by Camera Obscura but it might be a bit slow. Georgina suggested to use the bowling song from Grease 2. It’s a hilarious and upbeat song but I’m not sure if it’s my style… I'm not a big Grease watcher... I think I might choose some songs from the Big Lebowski soundtrack. Unless anyone has other suggestions?