---
title: A day of comedy
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2
category: apprenticeship
---

I can’t say how thrilled I am to be released from jury duty completely - just by asking “could I be released?”. I had a full day of waiting around in the juror’s waiting room on Monday. The whole day they called out names for people to sit on different trials but my name was never called. So lucky! So at the end of the day I just asked the question. I had a whole speech prepared about the reasons for why I should be released - and then they didn’t even want to hear it and just crossed my name of the list. Just like that. Wow. Sometimes it’s scary how lucky I am.

<!--break-->

So that meant that today I was able to participate in the communications training day that had been planned for a few weeks. As happy as I was to be able to go back to work, I have to admit that I was dreading that training a bit. I’ve been to a lot of those corporate training days, on communication, negotiation skills, diversity, company values and so on and so on… And it’s usually a bit painful. Awkward presentations in front of your colleagues, jokes that are not funny by annoying coaches, no one volunteering when volunteers are needed, death by PowerPoint and the list goes on.

Well, luckily, today wasn’t like that at all! It was a really fun day. Most of the time we were all doing exercises where we practised certain communication skills that we can use in the office or with our clients. And a lot of exercises were based on improv comedy which I really like (watching… I tried to do it a few times in an improv group in Sweden and it is really hard! I think everybody hated me as well because they had to do it in English when I was there. So that didn’t help).

One of the exercises that I really liked today was called “Mayor of Weirdsville”. In a small group you had to pick one person to be the mayor and make a completely ridiculous claim for the city. For example that all dogs should be replaced with cats. And the others had to ask questions to convince the mayor that this was a terrible idea. The mayor had to defend their claim. It was hilarious! I loved to just make a lot of ridiculous reasons up for why citizens of my town shouldn’t have any more children. It also made me think how easy it is to defend completely ridiculous ideas. Slightly worrying.

Another exercise that I really enjoyed was when we went around the group and told someone what they were an expert in. I had to play an expert in sheep farming for example. And then they asked me a question about sheep farming and I just had to make up an answer and sound convincing.

Coincidentally in the evening there was more comedy. I went to see Deborah Frances-White's show with a few colleagues. It was fantastic.