---
title: Unix commands
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 3
category: apprenticeship
---

Today I spent some time researching Unix commands. I often don’t feel comfortable using the command line for things other than navigating around files and directories, creating and moving them or listing directories' contents.

<!--break-->

So today I read up on it a bit more and had some revelations! Some of the things that I look at almost every day and didn’t really know what they were, now make sense.

I thought I’d list the commands that I learnt today. Hopefully that will help me to remember them.

`pwd`

Has nothing to do with “password” even though to me it looks like that on first glance. It means “print working directory” and prints the directory that you’re currently in to the console. I've never really felt the need to use this because my zsh prompt already shows me which directory I’m in and I have the folder structure of my laptop in my head. But I guess it comes in handy if I work on someone else’s computer.

`rmdir directoryname`

Ah! So you cannot only mk a dir bt y cn also rm a dir! Somehow this hadn’t even crossed my mind. But this only works if it’s empty. If you have files inside a directory and want to remove it, you have to use `rmdir -r` where the "r" flag stands for "recursive".

I previously always used `rm -rf directoryname` to remove a directory. A quick google search tells me that the “f” stands for force, so in this case also write-protected files will be removed without prompting. Hm… I don’t think I ever have write-protected files but I think it would be a good idea to get used to using `rmdir -r directoryname` instead...

`rm -i filename`

I knew the `rm` command to remove files but I didn’t know that you could add the flag `-i` which will ask for confirmation.

`command > filename`

This command redirects the output of the command into a file instead of printing it to the console. So if I typed `pwd > pwd.txt` then my current directory path would be printed inside the pwd.txt file. Not sure how or when I would ever use this though...

`command1 | command2`

Using this command you can pipe (redirect) the output of command1 as input into command2. That reminds me of the rule of the Unix philosophy about how program interfaces should consist of strings only to make it easier for programs to communicate with each other. So this must be an example of this rule in use!

`more filename`

Displays the contents of the file one page at a time. I’m not sure if I would ever use this - I might as well open the file in vim!

`chmod u+r file1`

“chmod” is short for “change mode” and changes file permission. But what comes behind “chmod” was a bit of a mystery to me. Until today! The first argument (where I put ‘u’ in the example above) stands for the person that receives the permissions. This can either be a user(u), a group(g), others(o) or all(a).  The second argument (where I put ‘r’) stands for the type of permission. There are three permission levels: read(r), write(w) or execute(x).

The “+” means that you’re adding permissions. You can also use a “-“ to remove permissions.

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
drwxr-xr-x   6 rabea staff    204  3 Mar 13:44 vim
-rw-r--r--   1 rabea  staff   2517 17 Mar 18:02 vimrc

</code></pre>


I also learnt today what these cryptic hyphens and seemingly random letters in front of a file mean! The first character says if it’s a directory (d) or a file (-). The next nine characters have to be considered in groups of three. The first group is for owner permissions, the second group for group permission and the third for world permissions. 

So in this example my vim folder can be read, written to and executed by myself (the owner), a group can read and execute the folder (but not write to it). Same with the world - they can read it and execute it but not write to it.

My vimrc file can be read and written to by myself, a group and the world can only read it and no one can execute it.

To give a group write access to the vimrc file I can use this command if I’m not mistaken: `chmod g+w vimrc`

`cal`

If you type this, a calendar is printed to the console! You can also give it arguments for month and year. For example `cal June 2015` will show you the calendar view for that month. Again, I'm not really sure about the usefulness of this... But I thought it was an interesting command.

`who am i`

…and how many?! Can be useful if someone else is logged into the machine that you want to use and you need to find out who it is. Or if you’ve had a few too many and can’t remember your own name.

To conclude this post I have to say that the research today has already made me feel much more comfortable with Unix commands. I think from now on I’ll use these commands more often and with less fear of the unknown!