---
title: Elixirising my Elixir Tic Tac Toe
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 3
category: apprenticeship
---

It's funny how it's possible to use a new programming language, get the application working, all tests passing, but the code looks nothing like what it should look like.

<!--break-->

I feel that it's quite difficult to learn how to use a new language in an idiomatic way. I'm lucky to have lots of people around me who can help me with that challenge. But what about people who are not that lucky? I guess you just have to read a lot of code and use it as an example for your own code.

I spent the whole morning pairing with Felipe today, which was awesome. He showed me so many ways in which I can use the features of the language more effectively and make my code more idiomatic.

Here's a really cool example of using pattern matching instead of comparing with double-equals.

I have a function to check if all three cells in a row are the same. If that's the case, the Tic Tac Toe board has a winner. My function looked like the below. Writing the code that way pretty much works in any programming language that I know.

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
defp same_marks?(first, second, third) do
  first == second && second == third
end

</code></pre>

But Felipe showed me this instead:

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
  defp same_marks?(mark, mark, mark), do: true
  defp same_marks?(_,_,_), do: false

</code></pre>

So cool!! This means that the first function runs and if all marks are the same, it returns true. If not all marks are the same, the second function runs and returns false. The underscores in the second function mean that it doesn't care what the arguments are.

A bit more generally I also learnt that I shouldn't be shy to return a lot of stuff from functions. Output seems a lot more important in Elixir than in other languages. And even returning different types from the same function is fine! This is not possible in Java and frowned upon in Ruby. But in Elixir it is acceptable to do that. 

In Elixir functions often return a tuple with a status message in the form of an atom as the first element and some other output as the second argument. These tuples can then be piped directly into other functions to do something with. Here's an example of a function that uses it. The function `valid_position?(input, board)` can return two different tuples or an atom and depending on what the return is, the `get_user_position` function either returns the position or prints an error message.

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
    def get_users_position(board) do
      input = clean_input(IO.gets(""))
      case valid_position?(input, board) do
        {:valid, position} -> position
        {:taken, position} -> move_was_taken(board, position)
        :not_a_number -> was_not_a_number(board, input)
      end
    end

</code></pre>

In general I need to try to change my thinking a bit more from passing in parameters into functions to piping output as new input into another function.

This afternoon I paired with Claudio, one of our visitors who also happens to be an Elixir whizz. It was really good fun. I'm really starting to enjoy writing Elixir. It has so many cool features!



