---
title: Java's super-power&#58; Polymorphism
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 3.5
category: apprenticeship
---

Seeing that Java is such a rock star, I’m not surprised that it has a super-power. Nice one, Java! It's just a shame that its name is so awkward to type. The word polymorphism is a real finger breaker.

<!--break-->

Yet, still better than digging around the swamp of my fruitless minimax efforts and not really getting anywhere. It’s a lot more cheery topic to talk about a super-power! 

I did some research around what polymorphism is and came to the conclusion that I’ve implemented it in the Game class of my Tic Tac Toe game during the last iteration.

One of the stories was that my Game should only know about a Player. No matter if it is a computer player or a human player. Just a player. So I implemented a Player interface which the Game class uses and when the application is executed either human or computer players are passed into the Game class, depending on what the user chooses.

But before I share my code for this, I should probably write about some theory. My research has concluded that there is static and dynamic polymorphism.

##Static polymorphism

This is achieved through method overloading. Method overloading is when methods which do different things have the same name and from the outside the only thing that distinguishes them is either the number of arguments or the type of arguments or both. When I first read about this when I did the Java koans I thought this was madness. So confusing to have a different method with the same name! But now I understand that it helps to keep the code cleaner but keeping the class interface small.

##Dynamic polymorphism

Dynamic polymorphism is achieved by method overriding. To override a method we need to create a new class which extends a super class which has the method that should be overridden. And then implement that method in the new sub-class with the behaviour that we want. Then we can instantiate an object of the sub-class and call the same method with a different result.

Both approaches sound a little bit different from how I implemented it but I think the polymorphism in my code example is dynamic polymorphism. Have a look (I omitted code that isn't relevant for this example). 

<pre><code class="language-java">
public class Game {

    private final Player player;
    private final Player opponent ;

    public Game(Player player, Player opponent) {
        this.player = player;
        this.opponent = opponent;
    }
 
    private void playOneRound(Player player, Board board) {
        userInterface.displayBoard(board);
        board.placeMark(player.getPosition(board), player.mark());
    }
    
    public Player switchPlayer(Player currentPlayer) {
        if (currentPlayer == player) {
            return opponent;
        } else {
            return player;
        }
    }
}

</code></pre>

The main aspect that I wanted to point out with this is that `Game` only knows about `Player` which in this can be the opponent or the player. And when it calls `player.getPosition()` it doesn't have the slightest clue if the player is a computer or a human. Both the `HumanPlayer` and `ComputerPlayer` are connected by the `Player` interface which includes the `getPosition()` method. But for both human and computer player classes, the method does something completely different. For the human, it prints a prompt to the console and reads the user input and for the computer it gets a randomly generated move.



## Polymorphism and coupling

Polymorphism can help to avoid tight coupling of classes. My example of `Game` and `Player` classes shows it. Previously my `Game` had a dependency on `ComputerPlayer` and on  `HumanPlayer`. So if either of those changed, `Game` would have to change, too. But now that I’ve implemented the `Player` interface, it acts like a placeholder for any player type. The Game only needs to know about that one interface. If I make changes to `HumanPlayer` for example, `Game` will never find out.

## Polymorphism and the SOLID principles

The magic of polymorphism also helps to adhere to some of the SOLID principles.

- Open-closed - again, using my code example: if I wanted to add a new player type, Game would not know about it because it’s using the `Player` interface.
 
- Interface segregation principle - through polymorphism it is easier to use more classes if they’re all united by an interface. So we can keep the interface of a class small and targeted without introducing a high number of dependencies to other classes.

- Dependency inversion - Polymorphism helps with making classes depend on abstractions rather than concretions. Just implement an interface and make a class depend on it rather than on a specific class.

## Polymorphism in tests

I also use dynamic polymorphism quite a lot in my tests to override existing methods. For example if I'm testing a class that relies on a dependency which has some complicated methods or methods that expect user input, I create a new class, make it extend the dependency class and `@Override` the methods in question. When Felipe first showed me this approach almost two months ago, I was in complete disbelief: "You can JUST DO THAT??". And now, it has become completely normal for me.


To summarise: Polymorphism is very useful. Thanks Java!