---
title: Shamelessly celebrating success
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2
category: apprenticeship
---

Last night I was at Codebar, coaching two ladies who were learning JavaScript. And explaining things to them made me realise how far I’ve come over the last year.

<!--break-->

I read somewhere that successes should be celebrated. And even though it’s not a recommendation in the Apprenticeship Patterns book (they say that you can learn more from studying your failures than your successes…) and it’s probably not very humble either, I think sometimes it’s important for your own morale to also reflect on positive things and not always just think about the negative.

Most of the feedback that I get from my mentors are suggestions for improvement (which is fine, that’s why I’m here…), but for my mental well-being I’ve decided to take the celebration into my own hands.

One of the ladies who I was coaching last night was struggling to understand the difference between the parameters of a function and the variables that are passed in when the function is called. It was so strange because a bit over a year ago I had exactly the same problem! I never knew which one was the placeholder word and which one was the word that contained actual data. It took me weeks to understand the difference! I remember that our instructor always said to me that I could call the parameters “squirrel” if I wanted to, and that helped me. So I could always ask him if this was a squirrel word or a word where it actually mattered that it had the same name as a variable that is already defined.

And last night I tried to explain exactly that to my student. I’m not sure how good a job I did though because she kept asking me the same thing! But anyway, this blog post is about successes, so let’s not dwell on that.

My other student was working on the CodeWars katas and she had already progressed quite far. I remember I tried CodeWars about a year ago and never really got any further than kyu 8 (1 is the highest level and it starts with 9) and the student was at 5. We went through some katas together and she had already tried a solution but it was very complex and involved a lot of Regex.

So I tried to break it down for her and tried to give her small steps to follow to achieve the correct outcome. And I got the impression that talking through it in that way made it a lot clearer in her head.

That reminded me of myself about a year ago. I remember this one time at General Assembly, when Jarkyn pseudocoded an application for us. I was incredibly impressed how she managed to break down the steps into small, manageable chunks that made the coding a lot less daunting. At that time in my head there was just a big mush of complexity and the feeling of not even knowing where to start. But the pseudocode really helped me and a lot of others on the course. And I think that I managed to do the same for my Codebar student last night.

So:  Yay!!! I’ve made a lot of progress!! 🎉