---
title: SOLID - Dependency Inversion principle
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 3
category: apprenticeship
---

In the first couple of months of my apprenticeship I decided to write a blog post about each of the SOLID principles. And I did - except one. I'd had this draft sitting around since forever and every time I wrote a new blog post, I was reminded that I never published a post about the last of the SOLID principles. It was really annoying me to have this unfinished business. I don't want to neglect any of the SOLID principles!

<!--break-->

So finally I'm going to publish this last post about Dependency Inversion. 

The purpose of this principle is to decouple classes as much as possible to make the application easier to test and to maintain. The two main rules are:

- High level modules should not depend upon low-level modules. Both should depend upon abstractions.

- Abstractions should never depend upon details. Details should depend upon abstractions.

I wondered why it is called dependency *inversion*. Because yes, there are dependencies but how are they inverted? So I researched it and found out that in the past (before SOLID), programmers thought that both high- and low-level objects should depend on the same abstraction. But this principle inverts that thinking, hence the name.

It all seemed a bit abstract, so I tried to find an example that is easy to understand. I came across the button example several times.

In the code snippet below, the `Button` class depends on the `Lamp` class directly.

<pre><code class="language-java">
public class Button {

    private Lamp lamp;
    public Button(Lamp lamp) {
        this.lamp = lamp;
    }
    
    public void switch() {
        if (/* lightIsOff */) {
            lamp.turnOn();
        } else {
            lamp.turnOff();
        }
    }
}

public class Lamp {
    public void turnOn() {
        // do some stuff
    }

    public void turnOff() {
        // do some stuff
    }
}

</code></pre>

The problem with this code implementation is that the Button will be affected if there are any changes to the Lamp class. DIP violation alert!

Another downside of this is that it will be hard to reuse the Button class for let's say, the TV. It's the same logic but we can't really reuse it for another class at the moment.

To solve these issues, the dependency should be inverted and the Lamp and the Button should both depend on an interface (called `Switchable` in the code below). Switchable gets passed into the Button class and the Lamp class extends Switchable.

<pre><code class="language-java">
public interface Switchable {
   void turnOn();
   void turnOff();
}

public class Button {

    private Switchable switchable;
    public Button(Switchable switchable) {
        this.switchable = switchable;
    }

    public void switch() {
        if (/* lightIsOff */) {
            switchable.turnOn();
        } else {
            switchable.turnOff();
        }
    }
}

public class Lamp extends Switchable {
    public void turnOn() {
        // do some stuff
    }

    public void turnOff() {
        // do some stuff
    }
}
</code></pre>

If we now wanted to add other objects that can be switched on and off, like a TV, then these objects would also extend the Switchable interface. We can just add a new TV class and don't need to change any of the existing classes (and we're also adhering to the Open-Closed Principle!).

I remember it was on my first or second day that Christoph explained this during our daily Zagaku lesson and I didn't really follow. I had no idea what this interface business was supposed to mean. Ha! Now I know!

And that finally concludes my blog post series about the SOLID principles!