---
title: Attending my first client IPM
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2
category: apprenticeship
---
Today I am taking a break from blogging about the dramatic events around my JavaFX implementation. I know, it's a gripping story but you'll have to wait until tomorrow to find out more. 

This morning I worked on some refactoring based on the feedback I received in my IPM. Then I was out all afternoon, first at General Assembly to speak to their current students about “life after the bootcamp”, then at a client office to attend the IPM.

<!--break-->

I was really excited to go to a client office and see what the IPM would be like. I had high expectations! I don’t know what I was expecting but seeing that Jim thought it would be really beneficial for me to attend it, I expected to learn about some magic that 8th Light can inject into a client IPM.

Spoiler alert: I'm 80% sure that there was no magic. But let me elaborate on that. 

The meeting was fine but at the end of the day it was just some people - albeit lovely people - looking at the features they’ve implemented and discussing how long it would take them to implement new features. It was something that in my old job we would have called “sprint presentation” and “planning meeting” in one. 

At my old job the sprint presentation would have been led by the project managers and the developers would have demoed certain features that they implemented. The meeting was usually attended by a few business stakeholders who nodded approvingly or asked questions about completely unrelated topics. _"I can't believe we're using that image on the homepage! Why is that still there?" - "Errr... you'd have to ask the content editors...? Now back to the responsive image gallery that I slaved over for the last two weeks."_

Then we would have a planning meeting on a different day, which typically went on for anything between 1.5 and 2.5 hours. It was so long because we discussed the approach for certain tasks as well as estimating time for them. Also we usually had someone in the planning meeting who liked to talk. A lot.

So comparing that to the meeting I attended today - yes, today’s meeting was hugely efficient. I was very impressed by how quickly the developers estimated the time for each task. They used the poker points concept and simply showed a number of fingers which reflected the number of story points they estimated per task.

Other than that they went through each story that they had completed, showed the change (it was mainly front-end changes so it was easy to demo) and added a story here and there if they thought of something else that needed changing. Then they went through the backlog, did the finger estimations for each story and that was it! No magic! 

One thing that struck me though was that no one in that meeting made it their own little show but everyone just focused on the common goal of presenting and then estimating. So is this what the magic 8th Light sauce is doing? Or was it a coincidence that it was a bunch of people with small egos? 

I guess I'll find out over time. 