---
title: Ruby and rspec making my life easier
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 1
category: apprenticeship
---

Today I’ve mainly been working on my Ruby Tic Tac Toe and preparing for my IPM. It’s such a pleasure working with Ruby again. I feel that things are much easier! Especially testing.

<!--break-->

I can use `StringIO`, for example, which pretends that a string is an I/O object. It lets you save what a method prints inside a variable and then easily access it again in your tests. It’s also very easy to give it some input so the production code reads that rather than waiting for a user to type into the console for the `gets` method.

And when I say "easy", what I really mean is "easier than in Java".

The rspec test framework also makes it easy to assert if a method has several `puts`. They are all saved in the variable that I called `output_stream`.

In the below code example I want to make sure that the last thing a method has printed to the console is “something”. All in-built and ready to go!

`expect(output_stream.string).to end_with(“something”)`

I think I'll need a lot fewer fake implementations and spies for this application compared to my Java Tic Tac Toe.

Well, but first I have to see how the IPM goes. It could be that all this built in magic is not favoured here at 8th Light. (I still remember the Mockito incident during my first few weeks here… When I naively suggested that I could use a mocking framework… Didn’t go down well *at all*! Hahaha!)