---
title: Adding a load path to my Ruby project 
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2
category: apprenticeship
---

Today I needed to set a load path for my Ruby Tic Tac Toe because one of my requirements for this week was that the application should run without calling Ruby with the main class.

<!--break-->

So I created a run.sh file in the bin directory which runs the application.

I don’t really know much about unix commands and how the shell works, so these kinds of tasks always make me feel a bit uneasy. Luckily I found some good articles online that described what exactly I needed to do.

I learnt that `$LOAD_PATH` is a global variable which contains an array of absolute paths. When you use the `require` method throughout a Ruby application, then Ruby tries to find the files inside the `$LOAD_PATH`.

I’ve always been using `require_relative` and then specified the relative path of the file to the current file. This works fine. But when I spoke to Uku about this on Friday he pointed out that if I moved around the files, I might have to update all the relative paths. Therefore it’s better to set the load path.

The two key lines that I added into the run.sh script are these:

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
#!/usr/bin/env ruby
$LOAD_PATH << File.expand_path("../../lib", __FILE__)

</code></pre>

The first line is the path to where Ruby is installed.

And the second line shovels the current file path into the `$LOAD_PATH` variable. The second argument of the `expand_path` method,  `__FILE__`, is a constant which references the relative path of the current filename. And the method `expand_path` returns the absolute path of the first argument, relative to the second argument.

So I added those two lines and ran `bin/run.sh` in the terminal… “Permission denied”. Great. Things never “just work”, do they?

Luckily, I found a command on StackOverflow which helped me out: `chmod a+x`

I’m always a bit wary of entering unix commands because most of the time I have no idea what they do and I worry that they might have repercussions that I don't understand.

I tried to research the command a bit more and found out that `chmod` is short for “change mode”. The `a` stands for "all" and the `x` for "execute". So, I guess `chmod a+x bin/run.sh` makes the file `run.sh` executable.

It didn’t sound too dangerous so I entered it and… it worked! I have permissions now and can run the shell script. Phew!

Then I was able to change all `require_relative` methods to `require` only. I also didn’t need any relative paths anymore to refer to the imported files. Nice!