---
title: Hugs from Git
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2
category: apprenticeship
---

Last week I went through the [Githug](https://github.com/Gazler/githug) levels as part of my stories. And it was really fun! It's kind of like koans for Git.

<!--break-->

There were a lot of things that I already knew how to do but I also learnt several new commands that I had either never heard of at all or that I had heard of but never really investigated how to use properly.

I made notes of all the new commands that I learnt (including how to deal with hunks):

##.gitignore understands negation with !
If I wanted to git ignore all java files except hello.java, I can write this in my .gitignore file


`*.java`

`!hello.java`


##git can move files
To move a file called hello.html into a directory called lib do this:

`git mv hello.html lib`

##git can add stuff to the most recent commit without any hassle
Forgot to include a file in the most recent commit? Stage the file and then

`git commit --amend`

##you can trick git into thinking that today is not today
make a commit with a different date from now

`git commit -m “some message" --date "Wed Jan 6  23:00:00 2015 +0300”`

(time and year seems to be optional)

##git branches can be tagged
I have to admit that I didn't know this at all. Apparently the tags are used to mark a specific point in time for a branch, for example a release of a version. 

Checkout a specific tag like this:

`git checkout tags/tag_name_goes_here`

##it's never too late to create a branch
Create a branch from a previous commit

`git branch new_branch HEAD~1`

or HEAD~2 or 3… depending on how many commits you want to go back

##sometimes you need to clean git
I had never heard of this at all and I have never cleaned any of the repos I worked on. Apparently this command optimises how the repo is packaged and removes any redundant packages.

`git gc`

##cherry-pick the best
Copy a commit from another branch onto master branch

On master branch: `git cherry-pick theShaOfTheCommitFromAnotherBranch`

##rename an older commit
`git rebase -i HEAD~3` —> get the list of the last 3 commits

From the list, change the word “pick” to “reword” for the commits that need to be reworded. Save and close.
Follow the instructions on the following files that open. Done.

##squash several commits together
`git rebase -i HEAD~3` —> get the list of the last 3 commits (déjà vu!)

Replace the word “pick” with the word "squash". Save and close. Follow the instructions.

##merge a branch as a single commit 
`git merge —squash feature-branch`

This will add all changes to the current branch. Then make a commit to commit all at once.

##reorder commits
Use the rebase command and reorder the commits in the vim editor by copy and pasting.

##git can tell you where your bug is
This is a really interesting one! With the help of git you can find the commit that introduced a bug.

`git bisect start`

`git bisect good shaOfACommitThatIsStillFine`

`git bisect bad shaOfACommitThatIsDefinitelyBroken`

Then it will ask you for each commit if it’s god or bad. Answer with:

`git bisect good` or `git bisect bad` 

and ultimately it will narrow down to the commit that introduced the bug. Nice job git!

##stage that hunk

One of my favourite things in SourceTree is to click the button that says "stage hunk". The word hunk just always makes me giggle. 

Unfortunately the git command is not as much fun.

`git add --patch the-file-you-want-to-commit.rb`

It will ask you for each hunk if you want to stage it (y/n/q).

##stage only one line (when your hunk is too big)

`git add -p`

choose: e - manually edit the current hunk

In the editor 

- delete added lines that you don’t want to commit  
- put a space in front of deleted lines that you don’t want to add

##git knows what you did before
Go back to the branch I worked on last

`git checkout -`

##revert a commit and show the world that you reverted it

Revert a commit by creating a new commit that reverts the previous commit (useful when you've already pushed to a remote and others might have pulled the changes).

`git revert shaOfTheCommitYouWantToRevert`

##I accidentally deleted a commit!

When you accidentally deleted a commit with git reset —hard, you can undo the deletion.

First find the SHA of the delete commit by
`git fsck —lost-found`

and then
`git merge thatSHAOfThatCommit`


All very useful stuff. I'll definitely start using the command to commit specific lines only.

Going forward I'll continue using a mix of SourceTree and command line for git. Some things are easier in the command line because I haven't really bothered finding out how to do them in SourceTree (or maybe you can't even do them). But one thing that I really prefer in SourceTree is seeing the git diff for each file. I think it's much clearer than in the command line.

