---
title: The eternal optimist
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 2
category: apprenticeship
---
I’d been working on my JavaFX spike the whole day yesterday and still didn’t feel like I was really understanding how to test everything. 

When I opened my laptop at home last night, the screen flickered and went black with some green bits. Broken! 

When I came into the bike storage room in our building this morning, my tire was flat. Again. I’d only just had the last puncture fixed two weeks ago. On the same tire!

<!--break-->

Being the eternal optimist that I am, I tried not to let these things get me down. I tried some big picture thinking on the bus into work: Hey, my live is going great! I have a great job, live in the best city on earth and have wonderful friends. Still… My mood wasn’t great.

Luckily when I came into the office, all three of my worries were resolved or at least lessened.

Skim said he’d look at my tire and help me fix it. 

When I attached my laptop to one of our monitors, it was still perfectly usable. So I restarted it and the screen went back to normal. Phew! 

Then I spoke to Jim about JavaFX and he gave me another story point to continue working on it. 

And as a bonus Felipe said that he was proud of me because I uninstalled SourceTree.

I knew everything would turn out ok!

Jim said that I should try to figure out how to write an integration test for my JavaFX button click application. Something that ties together a click on the button and the updating of the button label with the amount of times the button was clicked. I was still struggling with how I should write this test. I managed to create some more abstractions for the JavaFX button and for adding the event handler to the button. So I thought I’d somehow test that event handler class but I didn’t really know how to use the real JavaFX button and make it click.

Luckily Sarah showed me after lunch that I could create a new `JFXPanel()` in the test setup and then in the test I could call `button.fire()` which triggers a click event on the button. So now I’m firing the button and then asserting that the label’s text is “1”. And it works!

Finally I think I’ve finished the spike and got the learnings from it that I was supposed to: creating abstractions for the JavaFX elements and how to run the JavaFX stream and use it in tests.

Now I need to estimate how long it will take me to implement a GUI into my TTT.