---
title: Simultaneous HTTP requests
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 4
category: apprenticeship
---


All the test for the HTTP server are now passing - except one. And that is the one where the server is hit with 1,500 GET requests and needs to respond to them in under 5 seconds.

<!--break-->

Making that test pass was relatively straight forward when I wrote the HTTP server the first time. I used the ExecutorService to create threads that handle the requests concurrently, so I was able to meet the time limit.

I thought I’d understood how the ExecutorService worked and implemented it correctly in my second server but the test doesn’t pass - so clearly there is something wrong.

I started off with pretty much the same implementation as the first server but was asked to simplify the thread creation. I managed to eliminate quite a few classes but I think that refactoring might have broken it. 

## What is the ExecutorService?

Firstly, let’s go back to the Oracle documentation. The `java.util.concurrent.ExecutorService` makes it possible to execute tasks asynchronously in the background.

ExecutorService is an interface and in my application I’m using the implementation `ThreadPoolExecutor`. Which means that each task should be executed in one of the threads that exist in the pool. If all threads are busy, the task will wait until a thread becomes available. The threads exist until the method `shutdown()` is called. The advantage of using a thread pool over simply creating a thread for each new task is improved performance. Which is what we want for that last failing cob spec test!

So it doesn’t create a fresh thread for each task but it forwards the task to the thread pool and  an available thread will execute it. That reduces the performance overhead associated with starting a new thread.

The Oracle documentation “urges programmers” to use one of the built in Executors factory methods. Relevant ones for me are `Executors.newCachedThreadPool()` which creates an unbounded thread pool with automatic thread reclamation and `Executors.newFixedThreadPool(int)` which creates a fixed size thread pool. I’ve been using the latter one in my application.

## My implementation

To delegate tasks to the ExecutorService, I can use the method `execute(Runnable)`. And that’s where I see the first problem in my code: I don’t call `execute()` anywhere! I guess that was a victim of the streamlining I did a week ago...

According to the Oracle examples I need to create a new instance of the `FixedThreadPoolExecutorService` and then inside an infinite loop I need to call execute on that instance.

I need to pass a new instance of an object that implements the `Runnable` interface into the execute method.  And this bit always confuses me because you don’t call any method on this new object. But I guess how it works is that the ExecutorService automatically calls the run() method that comes as part of the Runnable interface. You just don’t see it in the code.

I created a second HttpServer class so I can make the new implementation parallel to the functioning one. I don't want to destroy what's currently working for almost all of my tests.

In Main I'm calling start on the HttpServerRunner.

 
<pre><code class="language-java">
public class Main {
    public static void main(String[] args) throws IOException {
        // some more setup
        new HttpServerRunner(serverSocket, router, logger).start();
    }
}
    
</code></pre>

The HttpServerRunner has the infinite loop in which the ExecutorService calls execute and receives the Runnable class which I'm currently calling HttpServer2. As you can see I'm not calling any method on it.

<pre><code class="language-java">
public class HttpServerRunner implements Runnable {

    public HttpServerRunner(ServerSocket serverSocket, Router router, Logger logger) {
        this.serverSocket = serverSocket;
        this.router = router;
        this.logger = logger;
        this.pool = Executors.newFixedThreadPool(5);
    }

    @Override
    public void run() {
        try {
            while(true) {
                pool.execute(new HttpServer2(serverSocket.accept(), router, logger));
            }
        } catch (IOException e) {
            pool.shutdown();
        }
    }
}

</code></pre>

This is the HttpServer2 class which creates a new ServerWorker and calls start().

<pre><code class="language-java">
public class HttpServer2 implements Runnable {

    public HttpServer2(Socket socket, Router router, Logger logger) {
        this.socket = socket;
        this.router = router;
        this.logger = logger;
    }

    @Override
    public void run() {
        try {
            new ServerWorker(
                    new SocketReader(new BufferedReader(new InputStreamReader(socket.getInputStream()))),
                    new SocketWriter(socket),
                    router,
                    logger).start();
        } catch (IOException e) {
            e.printStackTrace();
        }
    }
}

</code></pre>


Unfortunately the test still isn’t passing after I made those refactorings. Well, it's passing if I start the server separately and then run the test suite. Or if a process is still running on the port that I'm using. But if I run the whole test suite without the port already in being in use, currently it just gets stuck at the speed test and doesn't progress. All the other tests pass as usual but it seems to get stuck in an infinte loop when it comes to the simultaneous test suite.

Well, of course, there is an infinte loop but according to the Oracle example there needs to be one! So I guess it restarts when the port is already in use and thus breaks out of the infinite loop. But when the port is not in use, it doesn't.

OK, so I'll change my code to use a for-loop which is not infinite.

<pre><code class="language-java">

public class HttpServerRunner {

	@Override
    public void run() {
        try {
            for (int i = 0; i < 1500; i++) {
                pool.execute(new HttpServer2(serverSocket.accept(), router, logger));
            }
            pool.shutdown();
        } catch (IOException e) {
            pool.shutdown();
            e.printStackTrace();
        }
    }
}

</code></pre>

And I still get the same outcome. The test still doesn't pass or fail but just runs and runs and runs.

I think I will try more tomorrow. Maybe this is one of those late afternoon problems that seems to be insurmountable but can be solved in 10 minutes the next morning. 

As the last resort I will look at my first server code again and will try to match the implementation exactly for my second server code. Hopefully that will work.
