---
title: From minimax to negamax - or how to get your code to work
comments: true
layout: apprenticeship-post
read-time: 4
category: apprenticeship
---

In my last iteration I implemented an unbeatable computer player for my Tic Tac Toe. Nothing new here, I’ve done that in every language I learnt at 8th Light so far.

<!--break-->


I managed to get the minimax working in Elixir but it was really slow. So I started implementing alpha-beta pruning, just like I’d done for my Java and my Ruby Tic Tac Toe applications. But somehow, I couldn’t get it to work.

When I had my IPM I could show the code but I knew that it actually wasn’t doing anything. Felipe and Jim had a quick look at it but couldn’t spot any obvious problems. So how to fix it?

Jim suggested that I should just scrap it and start again. Implement it from a different angle. Make it really easy to reason about. And then get it working.

## The second attempt

I have to admit, that for the first attempt, I looked at my Ruby code which I knew was working, and tried to rewrite it in Elixir. The code looked very Ruby-ish, so once it was working, I refactored it until it had a lot of pipes and a lot of single line methods to make it more idiomatic Elixir code. I first implemented it with two recursive functions. One was the minimax recursion and the other was for going through each available mark, placing it on the board and then evaluating each game state.

When I started implementing the alpha-beta pruning, I came across the `Enum.reduce_while/3` function, which reduces a list until you tell it to stop or until it has used each element in the list. I refactored my code to use this function instead of the recursion, so I was able to break out of the iteration earlier if the branch could be pruned.

So for my second attempt I started differently. I started writing my code in the idiomatic Elixir way straight away, rather than writing some garbled Ruby code and then refactoring it. I had it clear in my head which steps the algorithm needed to take, so I wrote functions and piped outputs through each of them.

I first used `Enum.reduce\3` to go through each available position in the list and once everything was working, I started on the alpha-beta pruning again. I refactored it to use `reduce_while`, so that I could break out of the iteration earlier once alpha was greater than beta.

But again, it didn’t do anything! So I spoke to Sarah, who helped me by spotting that I’d forgotten to return the updated alpha and update beta. I updated either when necessary but then I never did anything with it.

I guess this was still a hangover from my Ruby code where the updated alpha and beta are saved in the state and I could access them any time I needed. Not in Elixir, where I need to specifically return them and pass them around so other functions can access them.

Unfortunately now 3 tests failed when alpha and beta were updated.

## Simplifying the code

I paired with Felipe for a bit who advised me to simplify and shorten my code as much as possible. He spotted a few opportunities where I could make functions simpler and I refactored accordingly.

Most notably he was able to shorten my scoring function quite a lot.

Previously I was getting the winner mark, then the winning player (computer or opponent) and then depending on who won, I assigned the score.

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
def score(board, computer_mark, depth) do
  board
  |> Board.winning_mark
  |> winning_player(computer_mark)
  |> score_for(depth)
end

</code></pre>

But instead Felipe suggested that I should shorten this into one function which returns the score directly for each possible return value of `Board.winning_mark/1`.

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
def score(board, mark, depth) do
  case Board.winning_mark(board) do
    ^mark -> depth
    :no_winner -> 0
    _ -> -depth
  end
end

</code></pre>

The idea was that once that I had simplified my code, I would see where the problem was. But I just couldn’t see it! I just didn’t know what was wrong with my code.

## Negamax

Ultimately, several of my colleagues suggested that I should try to write the Negamax algorithm instead. I had never used it, so I looked at the pseudo code and a couple of examples on Github to see how it is implemented. I decided not to use `Enum.reduce_while/3` again because I found it a bit hard to reason about.

So I went back to `reduce` and only called it if alpha is not greater than beta.

And finally it worked!

## Storing the result

When I wrote the Negamax algorithm I also changed how I stored the score, move and alpha and beta. Previously I stored them as two tuples in a list. But I changed it to a map, so it would be easier to reason about. Especially using `IO.inspect` for debugging was a lot easier.

This is what the accumulator function looked like before when I stored the values in two tuples inside a list.

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
defp accumulator(alpha, beta) do
  [{-@initial_score, @move_placehoder}, {alpha, beta}]
end

</code></pre>

Here is how I’m saving it now:

<pre><code class="language-ruby">
  defp accumulator(alpha, beta) do
    %{
      :best_score => -@initial_score,
      :best_move => @move_placehoder,
      :alpha => alpha,
      :beta => beta,
    }
  end

</code></pre>

## What I learnt from this

When I couldn’t figure out what was wrong with my algorithm for quite a while, I started to worry a bit about my challenges. What if I get stuck with a similar problem but am not allowed to get help from anyone? What if I waste days to find a bug in my code? What would I do?

What I’ve learnt from this experience is that you need to have a strategy to tackle this situation. A situation in which going through the code line by line and printing out and checking every output I’m getting isn’t helping anymore. So from now on, this will be my strategy:

### Simplify

Firstly, I need to try to refactor my code to make it simpler. It’s quite hard to do because I feel like I’m already writing my code in the simplest way that I can think of. Of course, other people can find simpler ways but I guess if I was able to do that, I’d simplify it anyway. But I can at least try.

### Go back to when it still worked

With my minimax and alpha-beta pruning I knew exactly at what step it worked and when it stopped working. I tried deleting everything related to alpha-beta pruning. Then it worked absolutely fine. Then I implemented the alpha-beta pruning again and it stopped working. OK, so in this case it wasn’t a successful approach but next time I’m in a similar predicament, I’ll definitely try it again.

### Speak to or pair with others

OK, this is not something that I can do during my challenges but it really helped me this time. If I hadn't spoken to others about my predicament, I don't think I would have thought to try the negamax algorithm instead. And if Sarah hadn't spotted that I wasn't retruning my updated alpha and beta, I might still be wondering whey it's not doing anything. 

### Rewrite

In this example it didn’t help to just re-write the minimax, because I think I probably made the same mistakes again. But writing the negamax algorithm worked. So if I’m ever in this situation again (and I’m sure I will be), I would try to find an alternative algorithm to achieve the same outcome.